Background
    CHAOTROPIC SALT: special kind of salt that is able to completely displace water by forming a cation bridge
    CHELATION: metal ion sequestration by a compound (chelator) that forms covalent bonds with the metal ion, incorporating it into a ring
DNA purification techniques
    Lyse
        Strong detergents (e.g. SDS, Triton X-100) - something that destroys nuclear envelope
        With proteinase K to remove proteins
        Or alkaline lyses for plasmids. In this case we need to get rid of genomic DNA, too
            Alkaline lysis denatures DNA, and affects more genomic DNA because it's more supercoiled
            After neutralization, we can precipitate genomic DNA
    Separate DNA from other cellular material: centrifuge
        This removes all insoluble material, e.g. debris, precipitate proteins
        We take the supernatant
        Spin columns: allow running the next steps more easily
    Bind DNA: make DNA bind to a solid surface so it precipitates
        Silica surface: negative charges
        Add chaotropic salt so negative charges interact with the cations rather than water
        The area becomes hydrophobic
        Then the DNA binds
    Wash: remove everything that is not DNA
        Isopropanol, water and salt: fixate DNA by creating a 'mountain' of hydrophobic layers
        Ethanol, water: remove everything else
    Elute: resuspend in nuclease-free buffer
        Nuclease-free water: short-term
RNA purification
    RNAses very active, and require Mg2+ or similar to be inhibited
    Special material (e.g. pipette tips) stating "RNAse free"
    TRIZOL: pink mixture of a chaotropic salt + phenol. Acid (pH 5)
    1. Add trizol to cause lysis. Also denatures proteins (including RNAses)
    2. Add chloroform and centrifuge to separate
        Bottom, pink phase => phenol, chloroform, proteins, impurities
        Middle, white phase => DNA and some proteins
        Top, transparent phase => water and RNA
    3. Wash with isopropanol => precipitates RNA
    4. Wash with ethanol => remove any remaining salts and contaminants
    5. Drying: remove any remaining alcohol (because we don't have the same columns as in DNA)
    6. Resuspend in RNAse free water
Quality assessment
    Gel electrophoresis
        AGAROSE: polysaccharide that forms a mesh suitable for electrophoresis
        AGAROBIOSE: agarose monomers
        Higher concentration => Smaller pore sizes => Better for smaller molecules
        Gels are prepared in Tris-EDTA buffer (e.g. TAE)
            TRIZMA BASE: pH buffer
            EDTA: chelates metal ions (like Mg2+) => inhibits nucleases
            Acetic acid: adjusts pH
            Distilled water: filler
        Needs to be dissolved, heated and then cooled so it becomes a gel
        Add intercalating agents to the cooling agarose to visualize DNA
            Disrupt DNA structure => make it deflect UV light
            GelRed is safer than ethidium bromide because it's bigger => difficult to enter cell membrane
            Shouldn't be added before heating to prevent degradation
        Ladder: size reference ('ladder' because sizes are of increasing size)
            Gene ruler: a particular ladder brand
        Degradation shows as a smear
        If you put too much, also a small smear
    Pulse-field gel electrophoresis: successively applies pulses at an angle
        When checking genomic DNA: problems if your fragments are very big => they don't fit the agarose pores
        All chromosomes travel the same distance (or don't travel at all)
        If we reduce the agarose concentration, the gel becomes unstable
        Or you can just sequence it - this is more used when doing plasmids
    For plasmids, depending on its conformation, it migrates more or less
        The 'real' one is nicked open-circular DNA
    RNA: use reverse transcriptase
        Copy into complementary DNA (cDNA) and PCR (RT-PCR)
        Then use standard DNA methods
        Resulting fragments are small => use denser gel
    Quantify RNA: photo of gel electrophoresis
        Compare to a reliable control: basally expressed gene (e.g. H3 gene)
        Relative quantification: a gene is expressed X times the expression of H3 or GADPH
        Usually operate in 8 bit grayscale images
    SPECTROPHOTOMETER: measures how much light is absorbed by sample => concentration
        ABSORBANCE: measures light attenuation when passing through a medium. A = ln(I_before/I_after), with I being light intensities
        Beer-Lambert's law: absorbance proportional to concentration for a given wavelength
        DNA and RNA absorbs UV light because bases have aromatic rings that absorb light
        Optimal wavelength: 260nm. Other compounds, other wavelengths (e.g. proteins 280nm)
        We can assess purity with absorbance ratios
            Ratio 260/280: protein contamination. Ideal >=1.8
            Ratio 260/230: other organic compounds (e.g. alcohols). Ideal >= 2.0
        NANODROP: spectrophotometer that can work with very small quantities => use when you have scarce DNA/RNA samples
DNA removal: required if we target proteins because it's viscous
    If we used a detergent that didn't break the nucleus, just centrifuge gently
    But if we target nuclear proteins (e.g. transcription factors), we can't do that
    Sonication breaks the DNA, but may 'burn' proteins
    Enzymatic: use DNAses that cut the DNA into fragments that don't cause trouble
        But nucleases are proteins, take into account!
Contaminant elimination: we want to remove SDS and similar because it disrupts downstream analysis
    Dialysis: introduce a semi-permeable membrane that lets small molecules pass (contaminants) but not proteins
    Gel exclusion chromatography: beads with holes
        Small molecules get into the holes and elute later
        Bigger molecules don't get into the holes and elute earlier
    Lead to highly diluted sample
Whole lysate quantification: how much protein concentration do we have in a sample?
    NanoDrop can't be used here because whole cell lysates contain many different proteins and components that absorb UV light
        Could be used if you had a pure protein
    BICINCHONINIC ACID ASSAY (BCA assay): protein quantification method based on colorimetry, compatible with detergents
        Add a set of compounds to the sample that colors proteins purple. The purpler, the more concentrated
            Cu2+ reduced to Cu+ in the presence of peptide bonds and alkaline medium
            BCA and Cu+ form a purple complex that absorbs light at 562nm
        Use bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a reference protein. Construct a concentration/absorbance linear regression and use it
        Curve is approx. the same for all amino-acids
        But high concentration of specific ones (e.g. tryphtophan) might change color and make the curve unusable
        Not usable with reducing agents or metal chelators (e.g. EDTA)
    BRADFORD ASSAY: protein quantification method based on colorimetry, compatible with reducing agents
        Coomassie brilliant blue: it's red when alone, becomes blue when it binds to proteins
        The more bound, the bluer
        Can be used with reducers and metal-chelators, but results are not good if the sample contains detergent
        More variation than BCA
        Dye is acidic => may denature proteins
        Better to use BCA if possible
