Diencephalon components
    Thalamus
    Hypothalamus
    Subthalamic nuclei: linked to basal nuclei. Motor
    Epithalamus: part of limbic system, plus pineal gland
THALAMUS: main relay station to/from the cerebral cortex. Part of the diencephalon
    Also integrative function: filters and modulates info
Anatomy
    On top of the midbrain
    Has left/right lobes, separated by the 3rd ventricle
    INTERTHALAMIC ADHESION: mass of gray matter that connects both thalamus units, through the 3rd ventricle
    INTERNAL MEDULLARY LAMINA: internal surface of white matter dividing each lobe in two
    EXTERNAL MEDULLARY LAMINA: thin band of white matter surrounding thalamus laterally
    INTERNAL CAPSULE: thick band of white matter connecting thalamus <=> cerebral cortex
        Above the thalamus, between caudate nucleus and lentiform nuclei
Nuclei
    Anterior group: in the anterior part, within the two bands of the internal medullary lamina
    Medial group: medial to the internal medullary lamina. AKA dorsomedial group
    Lateral group: lateral to the internal medullary lamina. Here ventral => lower than lateral
        Lateral dorsal: upper, anterior
        Lateral posterior: upper, posterior
        Ventral anterior: lateral, lower, anterior
        Ventral lateral: lateral, lower, more posterior
        Ventral posterior: lateral, lower, most posterior. Somatosensory
            Ventral posterior lateral: body somatosensory
            Ventral posterior medial: face somatosensory
        Pulvinar: posterior
        Medial geniculate: adhesion posterior to pulvinar. Auditory
        Lateral geniculate: adhesion posterior to pulvinar, lateral to medial geniculate. Sight
    Intralaminar: within internal medullary lamina. Indirect sensory pathway
    Midline: between the two thalamus hemispheres, surrounding third ventricle. Indirect sensory pathway
    Reticular: within the external medullary lamina. Regulatory (no relay)
Neurons
    Relay neurons
        Neurotransmitter: glutamate (excitatory)
    Interneurons: modulate relay neurons
        Neurotransmitter: GABA (inhibitory)
Subcortical afferents
    Direct/specific sensory pathway: specific information for a single sensory modality
        Info is not modulated, just relayed to the cortex
        Used to perceive details
        Somatosensory (VPL/VPM), auditory (MGB), visual (LGB)
    Indirect/nonspecific sensory pathway: diffuse information without topographic organization
        Info processed by reticular formation first
        Used to perceive that "something is happening" before perceiving details
Cortical afferents
    Layer V (large pyramidal neurons): uses thalamus as a relay for communication with other cortex areas
    Layer VI (corticothalamic pyramidal neurons): feedback connection to regulate thalamic activity
