Located anterior, caudal to thalamus
Anatomy
    Preoptic area: anterior, superior to optic chiasm
        MEDIAL PREOPTIC NUCLEUS: releases gonadotroponin-releasing hormone (GnRH) to the portal system of the hypophysis => gonadotroponin is released (influences reproductive behavior)
    Lateral zone
        Contains a "feeding center" => stimulates appetite
        Tuberal nuclei => release histamine => promotes arousal and attention
        Prefornix nuclei => release orexin => promotes arousal and appetite
        MEDIAL FOREBRAIN BUNDLE: bundle of axons in the lateral zone
    Medial zone (nuclei from inferior to superior)
        Supraoptic region: immediately above optic chiasm. The most anterior
            SUPRACHIASMATIC NUCLEUS: immediately superior to optic chiasm. Biological clock (circadian rhythms).
                Input: retina (needs to sense light to adjust cycles to 24h)
                Internally, clock proteins are transcribed cyclically (genes that turn themselves on and off)
                Output: pineal gland (melatonin), reticular formation
            SUPRAOPTIC NUCLEUS: anterior to suprachiasmtic nucleus. Axons extends to posterior hypophysis, where they secrete oxytocin and ADH
            Anterior nucleus: senses blood temperature and activates the adequate visceral response to regulate it
            PARAVENTRICULAR NUCLEUS: the most superior nucleus in supraoptic region. Same function as supraoptic
        Tuberal region: posterior to supraoptic region
            ARCUATE NUCLEUS: produces hormone-releasing hormones, secreted into the anterior hypophysis portal system
            Ventromedial nucleus: promotes satiety sensation
            Dorsomedial nucleus: emotions. Stimulation produces rage
        Mammillary region: posterior to tuberal region
            MAMMILLARY BODY: nuclei in the inferior part of hypothalamus. Involved in transforming short-term memories into long-term ones
            Posterior nucleus: almost continuous with periaqueductal gray, same functions
        Paraventricular zone: immediately below third ventricle
Tracts
    TUBEROINFUNDIBULAR TRACT: tract with axons ending in the portal system, to signal anterior hypophysis
    HYPOTHALAMO-HYPOPHYSEAL TRACT: tract with paraventricular and supraoptic axons traveling to posterior hypophysis
Senses changes in blood osmotic pressure. If pressure rises, generates thirst sensation
PINEAL GLAND: gland that produces melatonin. Not nerve tissue. Located in the epithalamus
HABENULAR NUCLEI: nuclei in the epithalamus, involved in emotional responses to olfaction

    