STRIATE CORTEX/V1: primary visual cortex. In occipital lobe
Processing levels
    Inferior: low-level features (e.g. color, contrast). In retina
    Intermediate: objects. In lateral geniculate nucleus and V1
    Superior: further processing. In V2-V5
Eyeball anatomy
    FIBROUS TUNICA: outer, protective layer of the eyeball
        SCLERA: outer, white cover of dense connective tissue
        CORNEA: transparent layer that covers the lens. Continuous with sclera
        LIMBUS: transition zone between cornea and sclera
        CONJUNCTIVA: epithelial tissue extending from the lateral part of the cornea, covering the sclera
    VASCULAR TUNICA/UVEA: intermediate layer of the eyeball
        CHOROID: vascular layer beneath sclera that provides nutrients
        PUPIL: hollow part anterior to lens that lets light in. Adjustable in size
        IRIS: extension of choroid that adjusts pupil's size. Responsible for eye color
        CILIARY BODY: tissue behind iris containing ciliary muscle
        CILIARY MUSCLE: changes the lens' shape, to accommodate vision at != distances
        Pupillary sphincter muscle: embedded in the iris. Makes the pupil smaller
        Pupillary dilator muscle: embedded in the iris. Makes the pupil bigger
    RETINA: inner layer of the eyeball, where images are formed
        PIGMENTED RETINA: melanin-rich, inner layer of retina
            Absorbs excess light
            Protects, nourishes and renews photoreceptors
            Why we see the pupil black
        NEURAL RETINA: signal transduction
            Photoreceptor layer: contains cells that absorb light
            Outer synaptic/plexiform layer: synapses between photoreceptors and bipolar cells. Contains horizontal cells
            Bipolar layer: 1st order neurons
            Inner synaptic/plexiform layer: synapses between bipolar and ganglion cells. Contains amacrine cells
            Ganglion layer: 2nd order neurons
        EYE DISC: point in the eyeball where optic nerve exits. Blind spot
        MACULA LUTEA: portion of the retina directly opposed to pupil
        FOVEA CENTRALIS: center of macula lutea. Has no rods, bipolar or ganglion cells => High-resolution color vision
    Lens: converging, to focus images in the retina. Inverts and reverses the image
    ANTERIOR CHAMBER: between cornea and lens, filled with aqueous humor
    VITREOUS CHAMBER: between lens and retina, filled with vitreous humor
MIOSIS: reduction of pupil diameter using the sphincter muscles
    Parasympathetic
    Edinger-westphal (ACh) => ciliary ganglion (NE) => sphincter muscle
MYDRIASIS: increase of pupil diameter using dilator muscles
    Sympathetic
    Hypothalamus => lateral gray horn in spinal cord (ACh) => superior cervical ganglion (NE) => dilator muscle
Retinal processing: information trimmed (99% filtered before reaching optic nerve)
    Receptive field of a cell: region of the retina that triggers a response in the cell when illuminated
    ON bipolar/ganglion cell: fires more rapidly when illuminated. Vs. OFF cell. Having both decreases response time
    Retina specially sensitive to image edges and temporal changes in image
    Horizontal cell: perform horizontal inhibition to sharpen images
    Amacrine cells: comparisons to make ganglion cells more sensitive to moving stimuli
    Ganglion cells
        Magnocellular (M or Y): big receptive field. High temporal resolution. To magnocellular layers of LGN
        Parvocellular (P or X): small receptive field. High spatial resolution. To parvocellular layers of LGN
        Koniocellular (K or W): intermediate. To intercalated layers of LGN
        Others regulate circadian rhythms (hypothalamus)
Visual field: part of the world seen by a person looking straight. Each eye's field divided into two hemifields laterally
    Nasal hemifield: the more medial one
    Temporal hemifield: the more lateral one
RETINOTOPY: maintenance of the retinal spatial organization in other parts of the brain (e.g. LGN, V1)
Geniculate pathway
    Ganglion cell axons form the optic nerve
    Nasal hemifields decussate in the optic chiasm, temporal hemifields remain ipsilateral => Overall process is contralateral
    OPTIC TRACT: continuation of ganglion cell axons after the optic chiasm. End in LGN
    OPTIC RADIATIONS: fibers from LGN to V1
LGN structure: 6 cell layers, separated by thin myelin sheets with koniocellular cells
    Magnocellular layers (1, 2): from magnocellular ganglion cells
    Parvocellular layers (3, 4, 5, 6): from parvocellular ganglion cells
    Ipsilateral layers (1, 4, 6): from temporal ipsilateral hemifield
    Contralateral layers (2, 3, 5): from nasal contralateral hemifield
    Each layer has a representation of its visual field that maintains retinotopy
    Fibers in LGN originated in superior retina travel directly to V1, through internal capsule
    Fibers in LGN originated in interior retina pass through the temporal field, forming Meyer's loop
PUPILLARY LIGHT REFLEX/PHOTOMOTOR REFLEX: opening/closing the pupil when lighting conditions change
    When only one eye is illuminated
        Direct response: illuminated eye's response
        Consensual response: the other eye's response
    Ganglion cells => pretectal nucleus (midbrain). 50% of fibers decussate in the optic chiasm => consensual response
    Pretectal nucleus => Edinger-westphal nucleus (bilateral, decussate through anterior commissure)
    Edinger-westphal nucleus => ciliary ganglion => sphincter muscle (ipsilateral)
