See also 12_neurobiology/12b_hearing_equilibrium.txt
Anatomy
    Ossicles: malleus (attached to tympani), incus, stapes (attached to cochlea)
    Oval window: joining between the stapes and the cochlea. Point where ossicle vibration is converted into fluid pressure waves
    Round window: where scala tympani ends. Into middle ear, but no contact with ossicles
    MODIOLUS: bone forming the center of the cochlea
    Scala vestibuli and scala tympani are bony and continuous. Scala vestibuli ends in oval window
    HELICOTREMA: connects scala timpani and scala vestibuli at the apex (end) of the cochlea
    SPIRAL GANGLION: center of the modiolus, where the 1st order neurons are
Physiology
    Auricle captures vibration and makes tympani vibrate
    Ossicles amplify vibration and translate it to fluid pressure waves, starting at scala vestibuli, then propagating to scala tympani
    This also makes cochlear duct vibrate => Stereocilia deformed => AP
    Inner hair cells mainly involved in hearing, outer hair cells modulate
Hearing pathways
    MONAURAL: pathway that involves information from only one ear. Contralateral
    BINARUAL: pathway that integrates information from both ears. Bilateral
    TONOTOPY: situation where fiber anatomic location depends on the sound frequency that excites cells the most
        Receptors in the cochlea sensitive to != frequencies, linked to their position. This distribution is maintained throughout the pathways 
    TRAPEZOID BODY: bundle of decussating hearing fibers in medulla oblongata. Ventral
    ACOUSTIC STRIA: bundle of decussating hearing fibers in medulla oblongata. Dorsal
    Spiral ganglion cells => Ipsilateral cochlear nuclei (medulla oblongata)
    Monaural pathway
        Starts in cochlear nuclei
        Decussates in trapezoid body
        Ascends in medial lemniscus
        Synapses in inferior colliculus
        Synapses in medial geniculate nucleus
        Ascends to cortex
    MEDIAL SUPERIOR OLIVARY NUCLEUS (MSO): sound localization based on time differences between signals in the != ears
        Uses summation (coincidence detector)
        Ascends through ipsilateral medial lemniscus and follow the same pathway as monaural info
    LATERAL SUPERIOR OLIVARY NUCLEUS (LSO): sound localization based on intensity differences between signals in the != ears
        Uses subtraction. Synapse in trapezoid body nucleus inverts sign of the contralateral signal
        Ascends through ipsilateral medial lemniscus and follow the same pathway as monaural info
    Primary auditory cortex (AI): Brodmann 41
    Secondary auditory cortex (AII): Brodmann 42
Descending pathways: modulate central pathways and cochlear sensitivity to certain frequencies
    From cortex, synapses in medial geniculate nucleus and inferior colliculus
    Then, to superior olivary complex (not in MSO nor LSO)
    Then, to hair cells in the cochlea
ACOUSTIC REFLEX/MIDDLE EAR REFLEX: reflex that reduces middle ear sensitivity. Triggered by loud sounds, for protection
    Better at protecting against long-lived sounds (needs time to start)
    TENSOR TYMPANI: muscle that pulls tympani, to decrease sound transmission. Innervated by trigeminal (V)
    STAPEDIUS: muscle that pulls stapes, to decrease sound transmission. Innervated by facial (VII)
    Superior olivary complex => Motor nucleus of V, nucleus of VII
ACOUSTIC STARTLE REFLEX: reflex that causes startle (asustarse) when hearing an unexpected loud noise
    Inferior colliculus => Superior colliculus => Reticular formation and spinal cord

ampulla: protrusion in the base of the semicircular canals
receptors are in membranous laberynths
vestibular branch of VIII: sub-branches exiting from ampulla, utricle and saccule
