GENOME: complete set of genetic instructions. Different life forms, similar genetic mechanisms
EVOLUTION: gradual change of a population's genetic composition for adaptability
    LAST UNIVERSAL COMMON ANCESTOR (LUCA): common to all current life forms, the reason why mechanisms for genetics is so similar
    PROKARYOTES: simple, unicellular
        BACTERIA belong here
        ARCHAEA: unicellular, in-between, some processes more similar to eukaryotes
        Genetic material is in contact with other cell components (no nuclear membrane)
    EUKARYOTES: more complex
        May be uni or multi cellular
        Has nuclear membrane surrounding genetic material and organelles
    VIRUS: simpler, doesn't have cell structure. Not considered living beings
    3 domain theory: bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes: archaea and euokaryotes descend from bacteria
    2 domain theory: bacteria, (archaea + eukaryotes): bacteria => archaea => euokaryotes
GENOTYPE: internal hereditary factors
PHENOTYPE: external expression, influenced by genotype + environment. Only the genotype is inherited
ALLELES: variability in genetic material within the same species
    DISCONTINUOUS variation: discrete phenotype, 1-1 relationship to genotype
    CONTINUOUS variation: continuous phenotype, influenced by many genotypes and environment
    NORM OF REACTION: set of phenotypes that arise from changing the env, keeping genotype constant (e.g. plants). No unconditional better genotype, depends on env. No knowledge of norm of reaction in humans
    WILD TYPE: the most common
Fields of study
    TRANSMISSION GENETICS: studies heredity in individual organisms
    MOLECULAR GENETICS: studies the chemical mechanisms of genetics
    POPULATION GENETICS: studies the genetic composition of species and evolution
Model genetic organisms: good to experiment in lab, e.g. drosophila
Applications
    Agriculture: selective breeding, genetic modified organisms (GMO, e.g. corn)
    Medicine: predict hereditary diseases
        MONOGENIC disease: rare, little env influence => easy to predict, BRCA1 gene mutation => breast cancer
        POLYGENIC disease: common, strong env influence
        Treatments: e.g. introduce insuline gene into bacteria to produce it
        Gene therapy: correct a mutant gene, underdeveloped yet
History
    PANGENESIS: genetic info located in != parts of body, travels to gametes and gets transferred
        Implies inheritance of acquired characteristics
    LAMARCK: acquired traits are inherited, unused characteristics are not transmitted. No longer accepted
    PREFORMATIONISM: inside gametes there is a miniature adult (homunculus) that forms the actual adult
        All traits inherited from one parent
    BLENDING INHERITANCE: traits from both parents mix and can't be separated. Proved wrong by Mendel
    Near 20th century Weisman rejects inheritance of acquired characteristics: cutting mice tails doesn't get inherited
        GERM-PLASM THEORY: distinction between somatic cells/gametes. All cells contain a copy of genetic info
    Sutton: chromosomal theory of inheritance (mitosis/meiosis), explains Mendel
