Background
    SUPERCOILING: further twisting of DNA. Can cause the helix to knot and change shape
        Positive: twisting right-handedly (increasing the amount of twist)
        Negative: un-twisting
    POLYMERASE: enzyme that synthesizes polymer chains
    NUCLEOSIDE: a nucleotide without the phosphate group
    NTP (nucleoside triphosphate): a nucleoside + 3 phosphate groups. Precursor of ADN/ARN molecules
        dNTP: deoxyribose nucleoside triphosphate
        rNTP or just NTP: ribose nucleoside triphosphate
    EXONUCLEASE ACTIVITY: removal of nucleotides at the end of a strand
    ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE (ATP): source of energy. Transformed into ADP or AMP when energy is released
        PHOSPHORYLATION: transfer of a phosphate. Usually involving ATP conversion
        KINASE: enzyme that catalyzes reactions involving ATP
Initial models
    Conservative: double strand replicated as-is. Not real
    Dispersive: fragments of double strand replicated as-is, then re-assembled. Not real
    Semi-conservative: strands separate and replicate. Each child helix has 1 strand from parent. Real
DNA TOPOISOMERASE: enzyme that catalyzes DNA topological changes (e.g. undoing supercoils)
    Type I: nick in a single strand
        Type IA: the intact strand passes through the nick
        Type IB: the broken strand is rotated around the intact strand
    Type II: nick in both strands
    DECATENATION: process of separating two circular DNA molecules, topologically linked after replication
Modes of replication
    ORIGIN OF REPLICATION: point in genome where replication starts. Not random
    REPLICATION FORKS: structure formed when the helix separates, where replication is actively taking place
        Either 1 or (usually) 2 replication forks, opposite directions from origin
    REPLICON: piece of DNA produced by a single replication origin
    REPLICATION BUBBLE: structure formed when the helix separates, contains 2 replication forks
    THETA REPLICATION (prokaryotes)
        Circular chromosome unwinds at single replication origin => Replication bubble
    LINEAR REPLICATION (eukaryotes)
        Replication rate is slower than prokaryotes and genome bigger => Parallelization
        Multiple replication origins with 2 forks, progress until fusing
Overall structure
    HELICASE: enzyme that breaks hydrogen bonds, splitting strands
    PRIMASE: synthesizes RNA primers, so polymerase can work
    DNA POLYMERASE: catalyzes synthesis, binding new nucleotides
        Only 5' to 3': adds dNTPs to the OH groups in 3'
        Requires a primer and a template strand
        LEADING STRAND (5' to 3'): synthesized continuously
        LAGGING STRAND (3' to 5'): synthesized in small fragments (OKAZAKI FRAGMENTS), starting with primer, 5' to 3'
    Primers replaced with RNA
    LIGASE: enzyme that seals DNA nicks
DNA polymerase
    Hand-like structure with 3 domains
        Palm: adding new nucleotides and verification
        Fingers: aid catalysis, close when correct nucleotide binds
        Thumb: attachment to DNA
    DNA-specific
    PROCESSIVITY: enzyme's ability to catalyze consecutive reactions (i.e. adding consecutive nucleotides) without binding
        Binding is slower than adding nucleotides => High processivity required for efficient synthesis
    Proofreading activity: can detect and correct errors to decrease error rate (1/10^5 => 1/10^7)
        Error => synthesis slows down, growing chain moves to exonuclease domain => Incorrect nucleotide removed
        Post-replication error correction => 1/10^10
Phases
    1. Initiation: recognition of origins, helicase binding, polymerase binding
    2. Elongation: leading/lagging strand synthesis, primer removal, Okazaki fragment binding
    3. Termination: decatenation (prokaryotes), telomeres and nucleosomes (eukaryotes)
In prokaryotes: always replicating, even during cell division
    1. Initiation
        Initiator binds to origin of replication => Replication bubble
        Helicases (DnaB) loaded with a loader protein (inactive)
        Helicases activate when loader dissociates
        Single-strand binding proteins (SSB) bind to unwound DNA to prevent secondary structure formation
        Gyrase (type of Type II topoisomerase) reduces supercoiling. Ahead of replication forks
    2. Elongation
        Primase (RNA polymerase) creates primers
        DNA polymerase III synthesizes both strands in parallel
            2x subunits Î±, Îµ, Î¸ catalytic core (5' => 3' polymerase). Îµ has also exonuclease activity
            2x subunit Î²: sliding clamp, to maintain DNA binding
            2x subunit ðœ: maintain the dimer together, bind to helicases
        DNA polymerase I: replaces RNA primers by DNA, has also proofreading capabilities
        Ligase: seal nicks
    3. Termination
        Ter sequence: where replication ends
        Topoisomerase II decatenates
In eukaryotes: tied to cell cycle. More involved: all origins once and only once
    1. Initiation
        G1 phase
            Origin of replication complex (ORC): recognizes origin
            ORC loads helicases. Surround a single strand
            Replication licensed: once helicases loaded and loaders dissociated. Still not active
        S phase
            Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK): inhibit helicase loading, trigger activation
            CDK remains active until next G1 => Load/activate once and only once per origin
            Polymerases bind
    2. Elongation
        Pol Î±: creates RNA primers, then elongates it (!= subunits). Low processivity
        Pol Îµ: leading strand, proofreading
        Pol Î´: lagging strand, proofreading
        Sliding clamp (PCNA): circles DNA, increases polymerase processivity
        RNase H: removes primers. Then replaced by pol Î´
        Ligase repairs nicks
    3. Termination: end of replication problem (telomeres). Also nucleosome assembly
        Lagging strand's end can't be copied: last Okazaki fragment not present/can't be replaced
        After many replications, ends up losing genetic info
        TELOMERASE: enzyme to extend telomeres
            Composed of RNA. TER: telomerase RNA component
            TER contains 1.5x the complementary of telomeres sequence
            Binds to ssDNA 3' end (leading strand), synthesizes (reverse transcription), displaces, repeats
        Afterwards, 5' end (lagging strand) forms Okazaki fragment
        3' end must be longer to form T-loop
        