Background
    CONSENSUS SEQUENCE of a set of sequences: sequence containing the most common nucleotide for each analyzed position
        If conserved => important function
    POST-TRANSCRIPTION MODIFICATIONS: changes applied to pre-mRNA. Capping, splicing and poly-adenylation
    EXOSOME: vesicle type involved in waste management and coagulation
    SVEDBERG: measure of sedimentation speed in centrifuge. Larger => Bigger molecule
General features
    Direction 5' => 3' (adding nucleotides to 3' OH)
    Single stranded: no Okazaki fragments
    No primers needed
    Topoisomerases important
    Transcription rate slower than replication rate
RNA polymerase
    Single enzyme that unwinds/rewinds DNA and synthesizes RNA
    Limited proofreading activity => More mistakes
    Crab claw structure, with a tail (CTD)
Naming conventions
    Upstream: 5' end. Downstream: 3' end
    Transcriptional unit: linear sequence of DNA that gets transcribed to RNA + sequences required for transcription
        Includes promoter + RNA coding region (UTRs, exons, introns), but not enhancer
        TRANSCRIPTION START SITE: 1st transcribed nucleotide. Position +1, increasing downstream
        TERMINATOR SITE: signals the end of the transcription
    Position of a sequence: indicates mid-point
    Control elements: regulate gene expression
        Proximal: located in the promoter
        Distal: Kb away. Silencers/enhancers
    Each gene always uses the same template strand
Phases
    1. Initiation: RNA polymerase binds, DNA unwinds, synthesis of nucleotides until leaving the promoter
    2. Elongation: actual synthesis
    3. Termination: polymerase reaches terminator sequence, RNA released, polymerase dissociates
Prokaryotic background
    OPERON (e.g. lac): DNA sequence containing a single promoter/operator followed by several genes, sharing control sequence.
        All/no genes transcribed.
        The repressor might be encoded by an upstream regulatory sequence
        a. Promoter
        b. Operator: control sequence, downstream the promoter, to which a repressor binds, blocking the path for RNA polymerase
        c. Structural genes
    Pribnow box (-10): part of the promoter. 1st bind point of polymerase, where transcription bubble forms
    SIGMA FACTOR: protein required to initiate transcription. f(gene)
    RNA polymerase holoenzyme: sigma factor + core RNA polymerase
In prokaryotes
    1. Initiation
        Sigma binds to core polymerase to form holoenzyme
        Holoenzyme binds to promoter consensus sequences
        DNA unwinds to form transcription bubble
        Polymerase starts synthesis
        Sigma factor released => No longer bound to consensus sequences
    2. Elongation: coupled with translation (no nucleus)
    3. Termination: two types of sequences
        Rho-independent
            Inverted, repeated sequences => Form hairpin that slows down and destabilizes
            Several consecutive A (weakest link)
        Rho-dependent: depends on rho protein
            Rho-utilization site (rut): point in RNA where rho binds
            Rho binds to rut and moves downstream
            Polymerase slows down => rho reaches it
            Rho has helicase activity => separates DNA from RNA
In eukaryotes
    != RNA polymerases
    BASAL TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS: bind to promoter, required for any transcription at all to happen. As opposed to binding to enhancers
    BASAL TRANSCRIPTION APPARATUS: machinery required to have minimal transcription: RNA polymerase + basal TF + accessory proteins
pre-mRNA: RNA polymerase II
    Promoter consensus sequences (in order)
        TFIIB Recognition Element (BRE)
        TATA box
        Initiation site
        Downstream core promoter element: in genes that don't have TATA box
    DNA template bends so enhancer-bound TFs can interact with basal transcription apparatus
    Pre-initiation complex: molecules required to initiate transcription: RNA polymerase + general TFs
    1. Initiation
        TFIID recognizes TATA box
        Rest of TFs and RNA polymerase recruited => Pre-initiation complex
        TFIIH melts promoter (helicase) and phosphorylates polymerase CTD so it moves forward (kinase)
        TFs released
        Phosphorylation state of CTD determines which processing factors (e.g. capping, splicing) bind
    2. Elongation
        Capping: adding a 7-methyl-guanosine at the 5' end
            Distinguish mRNA from other RNAs
            Transportation to cytoplasm (cap binds to cap binding complex)
            Recognized by translation initiation factors
            Protects it from exonucleases
            After capping is complete, CTD phosphorylation state changes => begin splicing
        Splicing: parallel with transcription
    3. Termination
        RNA cleavage
            Polyadenylation signals (PAS): sequence that indicates that termination site is close. Transcribed.
            Cleavage and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor (CPSF): binds to transcribed poly-A signal
            Cleave Stimulation Factor (CstF): recruited by CPSF, cleaves the RNA 3'
        Poly-adenylation of 3' end
            Poly-A-Polymerase: adds multiple A to 3' <= Poly-A tail, unique to mRNA
            Poly-A-Binding Protein (PABP): binds to A tail, helps tail synthesis and RNA stability
        Degradation of remaining RNA
        Dissociation of RNA polymerase
            Torpedo model: because exonuclease degrading RNA pushes the polymerase away
            Allosteric model: conformational change in polymerase when poly-A signals transcribed => Detaches itself
Splicing: pre-mRNA processing to remove introns => mature RNA
    Lariat model: introns removed by splicing 5', creating a lariat, splicing 3'
    Recognition: conserved sequences in 5'/3' (splice site), in the middle (branch site)
    SPLICEOSOME: protein (structural) + snRNA (catalytic) complex that performs the splicing
    ALTERNATIVE SPLICING: combining exons of a single gene differently to generate != proteins with a single gene
        Exon skipping: one exon not included
        Exon extension: part of intron included
        Intron retention: all of an intron included
        Mutually exclusive exons: an exon gets included if another is not
    ALTERNATIVE 3' CLEAVAGE: same gene can have several possible terminator sites => != proteins
mRNA transport
    Identification: retains processing proteins, exon-exon junction proteins, cap
    Transport happens through nuclear pore complex
    Proteins imported back once transport finishes
mRNA degradation
    Half-life: time required to degrade 50% of mRNA. Longer => more translation
    Poly-A tail degraded first. Then, either decapping + exonuclease, or exosome degrading
RNA polymerase I: produces all rRNAs except 5S
    != promoters, != TFs, TATA Box is common
    Upstream Control Element (UCE): where TFs and polymerase bind
    rRNA is very abundant => Several tandem-repeated copies of rRNA genes
    pre-rRNA: big 45S precursor. Modified and cleaved by snoRNAs to smaller, mature rRNAs
RNA polymerase III: tRNA, 5S rRNA, other small nuclear RNAs
    != promoters, != TFs, TATA Box is common
    Promoters downstream the start site
    pre-tRNA contains introns that are removed, and some bases are chemically modified
