Background
    RecA: protein involved in bacterial DNA repair
    ENDOSYMBIOTIC: symbiotic organism that lives within its host
    INTROGRESSION: exchange of info across species via crosses and hybrids, common in plants
    ENDOCYTOSIS: process where a cell uptakes external elements into its cytoplasm
    EXOCYTOSIS: process where a cell excretes elements outside of its cytoplasm
Horizontal gene transfer requires
    Mechanism of transference: e.g. transformation, transduction...
    Mechanism of stabilization: e.g. insertion, recombination
TRANSFORMATION: DNA is acquired from surroundings (e.g. other dead bacteria)
    COMPETENT bacteria: one that is able to take DNA through transformation
    Naturally competent: competent in nature (vs. in the lab)
    RecA mediated
TRANSDUCTION: DNA from another individual is packaged in a virion's DNA
    LYTIC CYCLE: virus DNA is outside the host's chromosome, replicates and ends up with lysis
        Attachment: phage attaches to cell wall
        Penetration: phage inserts DNA
        Biosynthesis: phage hijacks machinery and synthesizes components
        Maturation: new phages are assembled from components
        Lysis: cell dies
    LYSOGENIC CYCLE: virus DNA integrates in the host's chromosome and replicates with it
        Some phages insert at certain positions only
        Does not cause immediate death
        Can change to lytic cycle under certain environment conditions (e.g. unfavorable for bacterium)
        PROPHAGE: phage DNA integrated into the host's chromosome
    Generalized transduction: fragment of host DNA packaged by error in a capside, after lytic cycle
        All DNA sequences in the host have the same probability to transduct
    Specialized transduction: fragment of host DNA excised by error after lysogenic => lytic
        Sequences close to the insertion point have higher probability to transduct
CONJUGATION: two individuals in contact exchange DNA, usually as plasmids
    PLASMID: small piece of circular dsDNA living in the cytoplasm of bacteria. Can replicate independently
        Endosymbiotic with bacteria: encode for resistance (e.g. antibiotics), virulence... and plasmid gets to replicate
        Mobilizable: has an origin of transfer so it can be nicked and transferred
    Pilus: tubule connecting two bacteria to conjugate
    Each plasmid has a stable number of copies in each bacterium
    Plasmids may integrate in the host chromosome or not
    HIGH-FREQUENCY RECOMBINATION CELL: bacterium with integrated plasmid
    Plasmids can be used for genetic engineering
        CLONING VECTOR: piece of DNA that can be maintained in an organism, to which foreign DNA can be added
        MULTIPLE CLONING SITE/POLYLINKER: segment of cloning vector containing multiple, unique restriction sites
        SELECTABLE MARKER: reporter gene introduced with the genes of interest that can be used to select bacteria
            Did my plasmid integrate the DNA I provided? Only the ones that took the gene are antibiotic resistant
EXTRACELLULAR VESICLE (EV): vesicle generated by a cell that travels outside the cell. Can be a DNA transfer mechanism.
    Generated by all cells in regular functioning
    Contains many molecules, including nucleic acids
    APOPTOTIC BODY: EV derived from a dying cell. Function: being phagocyted
    MICROVESICLE: EV derived from a cell membrane. Function: communication
    EXOSOME: EV generated by a cell (endocytic pathway). Function: communication
GENE-TRANSFER AGENT (GTA): virus-like particles produced by some bacteria, containing bacterial DNA only
    Origin: part of phage genome integrates in host's chromosome, but lacks infective genes => Capsides with host DNA
BACTERIAL NANOTUBES: lipid tubes used to exchange molecules
STABLE REPLICON: foreign genetic element that can replicate or integrate autonomously. E.g. plasmid
GENERALIZED/HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION: reaction between two DNA molecules containing an homologous sequence
    HOMOLOG SEQUENCE: almost identical sequence, usually because of shared ancestor
    Functions: meiosis crossover (eukaryotes), DNA repair (both), integrate foreign DNA (prokaryotes)
    Conserved
    Exploitable for engineering
    Double-strand break (DSB) repair
        Remove some bases to leave 3' single-stranded tails
        Strand invasion: broken 3' strand invades the homolog strand. The displaced strand invades the other broken strand
        Branch migration: DNA synthesis 5' to 3' until the original chain is reached => Formation of two Holliday junctions
        Junction resolution: strands are cleaved and rejoined. May generate crossover, depending on the junction break point
