Background
    MONOMER: molecule that can react with other molecules to compose a greater one (POLYMER)
    PENTOSE: monosaccharide with 5 carbons. e.g. ribose, 2'-deoxyribose
    N-TERMINAL: the "beginning" of a protein, an amine group (NH2-)
    C-TERMINAL: the "end" of a protein, a carboxylic group
    POST-TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATION: changes to a protein after it's been synthesized
    Protein DOMAIN: a region of a protein that self-stabilizes and folds independently of each other
    GERM CELL: cell that undergoes meiosis to generate gametes
    SOMATIC CELL: any cell in a multicellular organism excepting gametes, germ cells and stem cells. Divide by mitosis
    HOMEOSTASIS: steady state of conditions in living organisms
History
    Mendel observed, no knowledge of why
    Sutton (~1900) rediscovers his work, postulates that genes reside in chromosomes
Nucleic acid structure
    NUCLEOTIDE BASE/NUCLEOBASE: nitrogen-based compound: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), guanine (G), uracil (U)
        DNA: ATCG
        RNA: AUCG
    COMPLEMENTARITY: each nucleobase binds to exactly one other: A <=> T/U C <=> G
    BASE PAIR (bp): fundamental unit of nuclear acid: two nucleobases bound together by a hydrogen bond
    NUCLEOTIDE: monomer formed by pentose + phosphate + nucleobase
        Nucleobases bind together in base pairs, base pairs bind via the phosphates (phosphodiester bonds)
        (Double) chain of nucleotides => ADN/ARN helix (~2nm ⌀)
    (???? is this correct?)
        5' END: the edge of a strand terminating in a carbon atom of the sugar ring, with an optional phosphate attached
        3' END: the edge of a strand terminating in an OH group attached to the sugar ring
Genetic material physical organization
    HISTONE: protein that helps packaging DNA
    CHROMATIN: complex of DNA + protein. Chromosomes are highly-packed chromatin
    NUCLEASE: enzyme that breaks phosphodiester bonds, splitting nucleotides
    ELECTROPHORESIS: method of separating charged molecules
        Apply an electric field with the molecules suspended in gel, so they move
        Distance traveled is smaller the bigger the molecule is
        Usually conducted within several lanes. Molecule weight size markers (known size) can be used to estimate unknown sizes
    NUCLEOSOME: basic subunit of chromatin
        Octamer of histones + 146bp DNA wrapping the octamer twice, spaced regularly every 200bp
        Nuclease protection experiment: treat DNA with nuclease, cutting away free DNA
            Limiting conditions: some free DNA ties are cut, others are not. Bands of N*200bp length => Regular spacing
            Non-limiting conditions: all free DNA ties are cut. All bands 146bp length => Length of DNA closely attached to histone
        LINKER DNA: free DNA that joins nucleosomes. May vary in length between species and cells
        Histone has N-terminal tails, undergo post-translational modifications when chromatin changes shape
        Histone has + charge
        Histone octamer: 2x (H2A, H2B, H3, H4) - histone variants
    BEADS ON A STRING: chromatin structure of nucleosomes + linker DNA (~11nm ⌀), loosely packed (~6-fold)
    30-NM FIBER: further condensation of beads-on-a-string (~40-fold)
        H1: histone that sits on top of nucleosome, binds to it and linker DNA. Compacts nucleosomes
        N-terminals interact with each other and stabilize the fiber
        CHROMATOSOME: nucleosome + H1 histone
        Exact structure unknown. Accepted that arrangement along helix axis. Several models
            Solenoid: the helix axis is hollow
            Zig-zag: linker DNA crosses the helix axis, makes more sense for longer linkers
    300-NM FIBER: higher-order structure, composed of scaffolding (non-histone proteins) + 30-nm fiber loops binding to it (looped domain)
    Metaphase CHROMOSOME: the tightest packed DNA structure (~10k fold). Visible only during mitosis/meiasis
        CHROMATID: each of the strands in a chromosome. Composed of packed 300-nm fiber (700nm)
        SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) proteins: protein complexes that keep chromosomes together
            (???? is this true?) CONDENSIN: keep the 300-nm fiber loops that compose chromatids together
            COHESIN: keep sister chromatids together (along the whole chromosome)
    HETEROCHROMATIN: densely condensed chromatin, observable. Chromosomes composed of heterochromatin. More present during division
    EUCHROMATIN: relaxed state of chromatin, thin and difficult to observe. More present during the rest of cell cycle
    TANDEM REPEAT: a short sequence of nucleotides that repeat consecutively
    SATELLITE DNA: large portion of non-coding DNA that repeats in tandem
    NON-CODING DNA: DNA that doesn't encode proteins
Chromosome structure
    SISTER CHROMATIDS: indicates that two chromatids are identical (after DNA replication). Vs non-sister chromatids (meiosis)
    CENTROMERE: region that links two sister chromatids. Required by chromosome segregation during mitosis
        Composed of ALPHA SATELLITE DNA. Pattern varies within species. Humans 171bp, 5k-15k repeats
        Must be exactly one: zero yield uneven segregation, two yield chromosome breaks
    TELOMERE: region at the end of chromosomes. Protection/stability functions
        Composed of minisatellites: short, repetitive sequences. TTAGGG in vertebrates. Variable repeats, 500-3k in humans
        T-LOOP: loop structure at the end of the telomeres, stabilizing them (as a knot)
        TELOMERASE: specialized enzyme to replicate T-loops
    Topography
        METACENTRIC: centromere in the middle, symmetric
        SUBMETACENTRIC: centromere between middle and end
            P-ARM: upper, shorter arm (plotted like this by convention)
            Q-ARM: lower, longer arm
        ACROCENTRIC: centromere close to end
        TELOCENTRIC: centromere at the end
    SPINDLE APPARATUS: cytoskeletal structure composed of microtubules. Required for chromosome segregation
        Named mitotic/meiotic spindle, depending on the division process
    CENTROSOME: organelle where the spindle apparatus microtubules are rooted at. Associated to the nuclear membrane (outside)
    KINETOCHORE: disc-shaped proteins, located at centromeres, where spindle microtubules attach to segregate sister chromatids
TBC: Chromosomal cytological analysis
Number of chromosomes
    Constant among members of the same species
    LOCUS: position in a chromosome where a particular gene is located
        ALLELE: the concrete variant of nucleotides present in a single locus for a single DNA molecule
    HOMOLOGOUS CHROMOSOMES: a set (usually a pair) of chromosomes with the same structure (same centromere arrangement and arm length)
        Usually coding the same alleles
        With different info (usually one from father, other from mother)
    PLOIDY: the size of each set of homologous chromosomes in a cell
        HAPLOID: each chromosome is different in shape/size, and has no homologous
        DIPLOID: chromosomes exist in pairs, every chromosome has an homologous
        Most eukaryotic cells are diploid, excepting yeasts and molds
        Gametes are haploid
        In diploid cells, each homologous chromosome pair, for each loci, contains 2 alleles, codifying the same trait, but with different info
    Number of chromosomes not related with biological complexity
Cell reproduction keys: copy genetic info, separate copies, separate cells
BINARY FISSION: how prokaryotes and single cell eukaryotes reproduce. Copy DNA, elongate cell, divide
Cell cycle
    INTERPHASE: set of phases where the cell is not actively dividing
        GAP 1 (G1, ~10h): cell growth and metabolism
        SYNTHESIS (S, ~9h): DNA is replicated
        GAP 2 (G2, ~4h): cell growth, protein synthesis, preparation for mitosis
    MITOSIS (M, ~1h): separation of chromosomes and cell division
Mitosis
    Yields two genetically identical cells, same num chromosomes (usually 2 diploid cells)
    Employed by
        Asexual reproduction in single-cell organisms
        Development of new organisms (zygote)
        Maintain tissue homeostasis by producing new cells
    1. PROPHASE
        Chromosome condensation (via condensins)
        Mitotic spindle forms
        Centrosomes migrate towards opposite poles
        Nuclear envelope starts breaking down
    2. PROMETAPHASE: transition period between prophase and metaphase
        Nuclear envelope completely broken
        Microtubules bind to kinetochores and start moving chromosomes towards the cell centre
    3. METAPHASE: chromosomes aligned at the cell equator (metaphase plate)
    4. ANAPHASE: sister chromatids are separated (chromosome segregation)
        Cohesin rings degrade (due to separase), so sister chromatids can separate
        Spindle poles move outwards, microtubules shorten
        From this point, sister chromatids are known as daughter chromosomes
    5. TELOPHASE: chromosomes at poles, decondense
        Mitosis ends when nuclear envelope reforms
    CYTOKINESIS: separation of the cytoplasm
        Begins late ahapahase, ends late telophase
        Contractile ring (actin and myosin) splits the cell in two
        CLEAVAGE FURROW: the actual indentation caused in the cell by the contractile ring
MEIOSIS: special type of cell division that generates 4 != haploid gametes from a diploid cell. Much longer than mitosis
    Happens after the usual G1-S-G2 cycle (DNA replicated once)
    Meiosis I
        PROPHASE I: lengthy. Yields recombined chromosomes
            LEPTOTENE: chromosomes condense, as in mitosis. Sister chromatids join at centromeres
            ZYGOTENE: homologous chromosomes approach and pair (SYNAPSIS)
            PACHYTENE: all homologous chromosomes have synapsed
                Structure of 4 chromatids (TETRAD) / 2 homologous (BIVALENTS)
                HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION (or crossover): homologous chromosomes exchange genetic material to produce variation
                DNA strands break, when repaired, some alleles from one chromatid inserted into the homologous (at the same position)
            DIPLOTENE: homologous bonds relax
                CHIASMA(TA): points where homologous are still joined
            DIAKINESIS
                Chromosomes fully condense, still bound at chiasmata
                Nuclear envelope breaks
                Meiotic spindle forms and microtubules attach to chromosomes
        METAPHASE I: bivalents aligned at the cell equator (meiotic plate)
            Microtubules attach to != homologous chromosomes (instead of a single chromosome)
            Tension maintained by crossovers
        ANAPHASE I: bivalents separate (chromosome disjunction). Sister chromatids still together
            Segregation is random: some chromosomes from father, others from mother
        TELOPHASE I: chromosome movement completes, nuclear envelope reforms
        Yields 2 haploid cells (1/2 num chromosomes, but with 2 chromatids each), != from the original and each other
    INTERKINESIS (interphase II): cell separation, spindle disassembly, chromosomes decondense. No DNA replication
    Meiosis II: similar to mitosis. Segregates sister chromatids
        PROPHASE II: chromosomes condense, nuclear envelope breaks, spindle reforms
        METAPHASE II: chromosomes aligned across metaphase plate, each sister chromatid aligned towards one pole
        ANAPHASE II: sister chromatids separate into daughter chromosomes
        TELOPHASE II: chromosomes at poles, decondense. Nuclear envelope reforms. Cytokinesis
    Sources of genetic variation: crossovers and random segregation
