INCOMPLETE/PARTIAL DOMINANCE: heterozygote phenotype = intermediate of homozygote's phenotypes (e.g. snapdragon flower)
    F1 intercross ratio: 1:2:1 (vs. 3:1)
CODOMINANCE: heterozygote phenotype includes the phenotypes of both homozygotes
    E.g. MN blood types: allele LM codifies M antigen, LN codifies N antigen. Heterozygous individuals have both antigens
Dominance can be studied at different phenotypical levels, and changes between levels
    Anatomical: whole subject (TBC)
    Physiological: subject functioning
    Molecular: single cell
    E.g. cystic fibrosis / CFTR gene. Mutation causes defective protein => thick mocus. Normal dominant physiological, codominant molecular
Multiple alleles: population may have > 2 alleles for same locus. Max of 2 present in a single individual
    Same inheritance patterns, more phenotypical variation within population
    ALLELIC SERIES: dominant relationships between all the possible alleles
    E.g. ABO blood type. 3 alleles IA, IB, i. IA = IB, IA > i, IB > i
LETHAL ALLELES: when present, causes early death of individual. Usually recessive mutations, only homozygotes die
    ESSENTIAL GENE: products required for development. Double mutation => lethal allele
    F1 intercross ratio: 2:1 (vs. 3:1), if homozygote dies at early stages and is not observed
PENETRANCE of a condition: sum(individuals expressing condition) / sum(individuals with genotype associated to condition)
    Condition with INCOMPLETE PENETRANCE: if penetrance < 1. May lead to incorrect genotype assignments
    Influenced by env and other genes
EXPRESSIVITY of a condition: degree in which a condition is expressed for a certain genotype
    E.g. level of polydactility
    Influenced by env and other genes
PLEIOTROPY: situation where single gene influences several phenotypes
    E.g. phenylketonuria also produces blond hair, blue eyes
GENE INTERACTION: phenotypes usually determined by the interaction of the products of several genes
    Each gene is still segregated and assorted independently, genotypes follow mendelian ratios, but phenotypes don't
    E.g. pepper color determined by the products of two genes => 4 phenotypes
    != dominance: interaction refers to 2 != loci, dominance to 2 alleles in the same locus
EPISTASIS: interaction where a gene masks another gene
    EPISTATIC gene: the one that masks the other
    HIPOSTATIC gene: the one that gets masked
    Usually 3 phenotypes: masked, non-masked 1, non-masked 2 (e.g. pigments)
    Recessive epistasis: epistatic gene is recessive
        E.g. labrador color. Pigment hipostatic, pigment deposition epistatic recessive
        F1 intercross ratio: 9:4:3 (non-masked-dominant:masked:non-masked-recessive) (vs. 9:3:3:1)
    Dominant epistasis: epistatic gene is dominant
        E.g. squash flower color. Pigment hipostatic, pigment deposition epistatic dominant
        F1 intercross ratio: 12:3:1 (masked:non-masked-dominant:non-masked-recessive)
    Duplicate recessive epistasis: both epistatic
        If genotype has double recessive for any of the genes, masked phenotypes. Only 2 phenotypes.
        E.g. pigment in snails
        F1 intercross ratio: 9:7 (non-masked:masked) (vs. 9:3:3:1)
COMPLEMENTATION ANALYSIS: given two pure-breed individuals with mutation affecting single phenotype, is the affected gene the same for both?
    COMPLEMENTATION: process where crossing two individuals with homozygous recessive genotypes affecting single genotype => wild type
        Happens if the mutation occurs at != loci
        Resulting individuals are heterozygous for both loci => Functional
        Doesn't happen if the mutation affects the same loci
    Complementation test: cross two pure-breeding mutants to determine whether their mutation affects the same locus

    
