bacteria cell wall composition - 
budding
Archaea: uses ether bonds for bind lipids to glycerol in membranes, bacteria uses ester
haplontic
probiotico: que tiene bacterias, prebiotico: que viene bien a las bacterias
no es environmentalist
gut bacteria affects HPA (stress) and vagus nerve signalling
methods*
metagenomics: analyzes the DNA expression of *all* micro-organisms of an environment (as opposed to a single one)


Exam questions:
1. the importance of micros (positives, negatives) in industry, ecosystem, human health
    Health
        + required for human body functions (i.e. microbiota)
        - cause diseases
    Industry
        + synthesize compounds like insulin
        + reactions like fermentation for bread, beer...
        - agents of spoilage
    Environment
        + required to maintain nutrient cycles: make N2 available for plants
        + bioremediation of damaged env
        - eutrophization
        - imbalances
2. methods of culture of bacteria. why do we use each method?
    Liquid: make them grow and multiply
    Agar plates: selective culture: places with != nutrients or antibiotics
    Stab cultures: easy to transport, migration/invasion experiments
3. characteristics of bacteria, archaea, fungi, slime molds, protozoa (***)
    bacteria: prokaryotes, no membrane-bound organelles, no nucleus, fatty acids bound in membrane by ester bounds (***)
    archaea: bound by ???
    bacteria does glycolisis (?)
    ribosomes: bacteria 70S, archaea 70S, fingi/protozoa 80S (?)

(***) Koch's postulates
    Germs present in ill individuals, not in healthy ones (we know last one is not true)
    Germs can be grown in culture (mostly true, but not always)
    Microbe must cause the disease when introduced a healthy individual (mostly true)
    After infecting a new host, we can isolate the microorganism, and it must be the same one (mostly true, but sometimes another microbe defeats the introduced one and it's this one that wins)

Virus
    Filterable elements
    You cannot culture virus just with nutrients, you need a host

peptidoglycan: glycan is the wall, peptides in the middle, cross links
    peniciline (beta-lactam) binds to the enzyme that repairs cross links => no new bacteria, old ones die
    Patrick Kelly

Relationship types:
    Mutualism: both benefit, e.g. our microbiota
    Commensalism: one benefits, the other neutral. E.g. bacteria that feeds on dead human skin cells
    Parasitism: one benefits, the other takes harm. All pathogens exhibit this behavior. E.g. plasmodium spp. (malaria)
        Obligate parasites: they die without the host (e.g. malaria)
        Facultative parasites: they can survive on their own, but may become parasites under certain conditions
        Protozoa
(***) Pathogenicity: capacity to cause disease in the host. Influenced by the host's resistance and the microbe itself
    Virulence: how severe the disease is
    E.g. vaccines should have high pathogenicity, but low virulence
    Virulence factors
        adhesins: capacity to attach to host cells
        exotoxins: secreted by bacteria and cause famage
        endotoxins: toxins released when a bacterium dies
        capacity to evade the immune system
Innate immunity: built-in one (without the need to get infected): rapid, non-specific
    Physical: e.g. barrier
    Chemical: lysozyme in saliva
    Cellular: e.g. phagocytes
cytokines: beacon to attract immune cell system
Adaptive immunity: slower to activate but specific
    Humoral: antibodies in the serum (?)
    Cellular:
        (***) cytotoxic T lymphocytes can trigger apoptosis in our own infected cells
        Macrophages (phagocytosis) and natural killer cells (cytotoxines to kill infected cells)
        Cytokine production
Steps
    Portal of entry: e.g. wound
    Adhesion: bind to host cells. Host needs to be suspeciptible
    Invasion: multiply and break barriers
    Immune system evasion
    Damage: toxins (directly), trigger the immune system to damage our own cells
    Exit: to infect more hosts
Reservoir: zone in the host where the microbe lives and grows
Zoonotic infections: from animal to humans
    (***) Host jump: pathogen changes species. Requires changes in the pathogens
        Genetic mutations: spontaneous, virus genetic material can combine, horizontal gene transfer...
        Ecological factors: caused by us. E.g. increased contact because of deforestation
        Host factors: similarity to host, immune system weakening
        Pathogen factors: generalists vs specialists
Transmission route: how is a microbe transmitted?
(***) Red Queen Hypothesis: both host and parasites evolve and "run" to maintain their fitness
    Importance of sexual reproduction: otherwise, not enough genetic variation
More complex/specialized parasites are more specific to a certain type of host.
Microbiome mediated resistance
    They compete with parasites for resources
    Produce substances that kill parasites
    Stimulate the host's immune system
    They can be disrupted by parasites, e.g. by depleting resources
    They can also be positive to parasites
Trypanosoma brucei: (vector tse-tse fly)
    fly takes the parasite when taking their blood
    injects to host's blood
    reproduce in blood: 1st phase
    cross blood/brain barrier: neurological phase
Neurotropism: ability of a virus to infect nervous system
    E.g. herpes simplex virus: encephalitis, meningitis
    Diagnosed via PCR
    Symptoms
    HSV-1 may be implicated in Alzheimer
    Retrograde: from the axon in, anteretrograde: to the axon out
    Rabies virus
Immune evasion
    Antigenic variation: cell surface proteins change constantly to avoid recognition. e.g. trypanosoma. Might be on purpose or by mutations
    


    


measles = sarampión
mumps = paperas
ticks = garrapatas


