Bacteria
    Endospores: a dormant bacterium. On lack of nutrients, they can enter this form. Very difficult to destroy
    Plasmids
        F plasmids: fertility (pillus)
        R plasmid: resistance
        Col: competition between bacteria
        Degradative: enzymes like proteases
        Virulence: makes the bacteria more virulent
    Biofilms: structure created by bacteria that is difficult to remove
        MSCRAMMs: glue proteins used to attach to the surface
        eDNA = extracellular DNA
    Antibiotic resistance
        Inactivation: enzymes that inactivate antibiotics
        Altered target sites: alter the targets so they don't work
        Reduced drug uptake: don't swallow antibiotics
        Pump antibiotics out

Virus
    Genetic material
        DNA or RNA
        Single-stranded or double-stranded
        Positive-sense RNA: can be used directly as mRNA. vs negative-sense RNA (needs retro-transcription)
        Baltimore system: 7 classes of viruses (no va a preguntar)
            dsDNA: just transcribe
            ssDNA: first synthesize the other strand, then transcribe
            dsRNA: one of the strands is replicated to form mRNA
            +ssRNA: is directly mRNA. Or negative sense is formed, and then ~ dsRNA
            -ssRNA: ~ssDNA
            ssRNA-RT: retro-transcribe DNA, integrate into host genome, transcribe
            dsDNA-RT: ???
    Capsid
        Naked = doesn't have envelope
        Protects and facilitates entering the cell
        Made of capsomeres (proteins)
    Envelope: lipid bilayer
        Not produced by the virus, taken from host
        Facilitates entering the cell
        Makes them sensitive to detergents
    Provirus/prophage: the one integrated in the host cell's chromosome, vs. virions (already mature)
    Attachment/entry
        Use glycoproteins in the virus' surface to attach
        Direct penetration: envelope fuses with cell membrane
        Endocytosis. Clathrin
    Cytopathic effects: lysis, detachment, rounding
    Interferon: antiviral proteins produced by the host
    Immune evasion
        Antigenic variation: viral proteins change (e.g. flu)
        Interferon inhibition: block producing or functioning of interferons
        Downregulate MHC
        Attack the immune system
        Block the immune response
    therapies
        Target viral process, e.g. entry, replication, assembly. E.g. antiretroviral: HIV
        Vaccines
            Live attenuated: weakened virus
            Inactivated virus: killed virus
            Subunits: not the entire virus, but only proteins (antigens)
            mRNA: only the mRNA, so our cells produce the viral proteins
Prions: infectious protein
    CJD can be caused by ingesting mad cow disease meat
Viroids: non-encapsulated DNA molecules. Primarily infects plants
JoVE


Which organisms are more related? humans and (mold, archaea, proteobacteria)? Humands and mold
Which are more related? Mitochondria and animal cells or proteobacteria? Mitochondria and protobacteria
This supports the endosymbiotic theory
Gram negative: because it has outer membrane and no peptido-glycans
Molecule like sugar in gram-negative
    Sugars can be transported by porins (channels?). It requires these protein channels. Proteins are molecule-specific
    Enzymes that break huge polymers: outside the membrane
    Enzymes that synthesize crosslinks: in the peri-cytoplasmic space
    Enzymes that allow specific nutrients into the cell: in the peri-cytoplasmic space
    DNA replication: in the cytoplasm
To make them gram-positive, remove the outer layer and make the inner layer thick and made of peptido-glycans

