B cells
    Start in bone marrow (immature)
    Then go to the spleen (naive)
T cells
    First in bone marrow, then in thymus
    Kill by secreting perforin

lymphopoiesis
    central/primary lymphoid organs: where lymphocytes are produced
    B cells: bone marrows
    T cells: thymus in kids, lymphoid nodules in adults
    secondary lymphoid organs: MALT, spleen, nodes <= where they encounter antigens
B cell development
    generation of BCRs (bone marrow)
    negative selection (check they don't recognize self antigens, bone marrow)
    migration to secondary organs
    encounter antigen
    CD19: lineage marker for B cells
Phases TL;DR
    1. Pre-pro: recombination in heavy chain started
    2. Pro: DJ recombination in heavy chain finished
    3. Late pro: VDJ recombination in heavy chain finished
    4. Large pre: express a preBCR, with the complete heavy chain and a surrogate light chain
        Positive selection: can it bind to something? Stromal cell used for testing
        If it can't, test with the other chromosome. If it can't, apoptosis
        If it passes the test, clonal proliferation
    5. Small pre: recombination VJ in light chain started
    6. Immature B cell: recombination VJ in light chain finished
        Positive selection: can the light chain bind to the heavy chain? If it can't, try rearranging other genes (2 genes involved in light chain)
        Cell detaches from stromal cell
        Negative selection: don't do harm
            If the cell binds strongly to self-antigens, eliminate it
            If it bind lightly, edit it and try again



from common lymphoid progenitor to B cell
    1. pre-pro: start in the bone marrow
        close to mesenchymal stromal cells
            mechanical support
            cytokines
        (names not required) VCAM1: adhesion molecule in the stromal cell
        stromal cell and pre-pro are bound by adhesion molecules
        pre-proliferative signal: stromal cell tells B cell to proliferate
        stromal cell produces cytokines to make B cell differentiate (express new genes)
        initiates somatic recombination: recombination of immunoglobulin genes to produce != BCRs
    2. pro: somatic recombination finished
        immunoglobulin gene has several kind of segments, categories:
            V segment: variable
            D segment: diversity
            J segment: joining
        light chain has 2 genes, heavy just 1
        by recombining we choose 1 segment of each type (although light chains don't have D)
        V-D-J recombination: for heavy chain
        each segment type flanked by conserved sequences that identify segment type
        at this point, D and J are chosen
    3. late-pro
        still in the bone marrow
        another cytokine (IL7) => proliferation
        at this point, V is chosen
        the 2 chromosomes are probably != => one is shut off
    4. large pre
        Ig gene: has one exon for each type of antibody it might express, separated by introns
        pre-BCR: has the variable region we chose, and the IgM heavy chain
        the other types for when we do class switching
        surrogate light chain: a chain we know it's okay, but it can test whether the heavy chain is OK
            doesn't bind antigens, but bind to things in the bone marrow
            if it binds successfully, it's OK and we can proceed. Otherwise, apoptosis
            we try the 2nd chromosome if the 1st one didn't work
        this is called positive selection
        this cell now proliferates
    5. small pre
        recombines the light chain
        has only L and J segments
        combinatorial joining: the diversity generated by introducing variability in the heavy and in the light chains
    6. Immature B cell
        After the light chain is recombined, detaches from stromal cell
        has 4 genes (2 in each chromosome) to choose from. Has either kappa or lambda, not both
        performs another test
    Negative selection: do not harm yourself
        in the bone marrow
        if it doesn't recognize anything, allowed to go
        if it does
            binds strongly to something => killed
            binds moderately => go backwards and recombine again (by changing the light chain)
        this is called central tolerance
    Now goes to the spleen
        changes the alternative splicing to make also IgX?
        white pulp
            B cell follicles, where naive B cells go
            T cells
            has also many antigen-presenting cells, so the B cells watch
    <============= until slide 26
    
