Background
    DYSENTERY: gastroenteritis causing bloody diarrhea
Structures
    Unicellular, eukaryotic cells
    PELLICLE: structure surrounding some protozoa's cell membrane. Protozoa's equivalent to a cell wall, but less rigid
    APICAL COMPLEX: structure present in the apical part of some protozoa that allows them to enter into host cells to parasite them
        E.g. plasmodium
    SUCTION DISC/VENTRAL DISC: cytoskeletal structure that allows some protozoans to attach to host surfaces
        E.g. Giardia duodenalis (diarrhea - life cycle similar to amoeba histolytica)
Immune system evasion
    VARIANT SURFACE GLYCOPROTEIN (VSG): protein in the surface of trypanosoma. Involved in antigen variation
        Each trypanosoma expresses one VSG, but has genes for many different variations of the protein
        After sexual reproduction, the new trypanosoma may express != VSGs by changing gene expression
    Living inside cells
    Immune suppression: e.g. trypanosoma may secrete molecules that degrade cytokines
Classification based on locomotion
    Amoeboid: use pseudopodia. E.g. entamoeba histolytica
    Flagellates: use flagella. E.g. trypanosoma
    Ciliates: use cilia. 
    Sporozoans: don't have motility in adult species. Use spores and have complex life cycles. E.g. plasmodium, toxoplasma gondii
Life cycle of sporozoans: use an insect as intermediate host, as a vector for transmission
    CYST: resistant, low metabolism form that some protozoa can transform into when conditions are unfavorable
        E.g. survive stomach pH until reaching the intestine
        EXCYSTATION: process of exiting the cyst state and transform into the active form
    SPOROZOITE: protozoan cells in the insect. Invade the host when the insect bites it
    SCHIZOGONY: type of asexual reproduction in protozoans where a cell divides its nucleus several times before splitting its cytoplasm
    SCHIZONT: protozoan cell living inside the host's cells that has divided its nucleus (multi-nucleated) but hasn't separated its cytoplasm yet
    MEROZOITE: protozoan daughter cell result of schizogony
    TROPHOZOITE: activated state of a protozoan (vs. sporozoite)
    GAMETOCYTE: protozoan cells that can differentiate into male or female gametes
    OOCYST: protozoan structure surrounded by a thick wall where many sporozoites are generated by mitosis
    Plasmodium (malaria) life cycle
        Haploid, sporozoan, with apical complex
        Sporozoites in mosquito's salivary glands
        When mosquitoes bite a human, sporozoites enter the blood stream and invade hepatocytes
        Sporozoites multiply in hepatocytes by schizogony until lysis => merozoites released to the blood stream
        Merozoite enters an erythrocyte and feeds inside of it => now called trophozoite
        Trophozoite multiplies by schizogony in erythrocytes => produce more merozoites
        Some merozoites differentiate into gametocytes
        When another mosquito bites, gametocytes enter it and reach the mosquito's gut => mature into micro/macro gametocytes
        Gametocytes fuse => zygote (diploid) => (via meiosis) ookinete (haploid, motile)
        Ookinete penetrates the mosquito's midgut => oocyst
        Oocyst breaks and releases many sporozoites => migrate to salivary glands
    Entamoeba histolytica (dysentery) life cycle
        Amoeboid, no apical complex
        Mature cyst (cell with 4 nuclei) is ingested through contaminated food/water
        Cyst resists stomach acid (trophozoites can't) => arrive at the small intestine
        Excyst in small intestine => trophozoites => migrate to large intestine
        Trophozoites invade intestinal mucosa and reproduce => new cysts
        Cysts are excreted with feces => contaminate food and water
