Background
    CELL ENVELOPE: in bacteria, cell membranes (inner and outer if Gram-negative) + cell wall
    BACTERIOCIN: bacterial toxin that inhibits proliferation of similar bacteria
Bacterial morphologies and arrangements: guide further 
    Coccus: spherical
    Bacillus: rod-shaped
    Spirillus: spiral
    Vibrios: comma-shaped
    Diplo-: arranged in pairs
    Strepto-: twisted chain
    Staphylococcus: cocci arranged in grape-shaped groups
    Cuboidal: sarcinae
    Helical
GRAM STAINING: stain bacteria targeting the peptidoglycan component of their wall
    GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA: stain purple in Gram staining
        Inner membrane: usual lipid bilayer
        Cell wall: thick peptidoglycan layer
        TEICHOIC ACID: embedded in the peptidoglycan wall, to provide flexibility
    GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTERIA: stain pink in Gram staining
        Inner membrane: usual lipid bilayer
        Cell wall: thin peptidoglycan layer
        Outer membrane: another lipid bilayer, with porins and lipopolysaccharides
        Lipopolysaccharides: attached to the outer membrane. Act as an endotoxin. Recognized by toll-like receptors
            Lipid A: the lipid actually embedded in the outer membrane. The toxic part
            Core oligosaccharide: sugars attached to lipid A
            O-antigen: long polysaccharide chain that varies between species
        PORIN: transmembrane protein in the outer membrane that allows the selective passing of certain molecules
        PERIPLASMIC SPACE: space between the inner membrane and the cell wall
    Antibiotics targeting peptidoglycan synthesis (e.g. penicillin) more effective against Gram-positive
    Gram-negative lipopolysaccharides increase virulence
BACTERIAL CAPSULE: layer of polysaccharides surrounding the cell envelope (glycocalyx)
    Prevents phagocytosis by covering bacterial PAMPs (virulence factor)
    Adherence
    Holds water => protects the bacterium from dying out
FIMBRIAE: short protein threads extending from the bacterium's surface. For adherence
    Composed of different protein subunits (pilin)
    Usher proteins (also in pili): integral membrane proteins that guide the polymerization of pilin subunits
PILI: long protein protrusions extending from the bacterium's surface. Less numerous, bigger than fimbriae
    Conjugation (plasmid exchange)
    Motility (type IV)
    Composed of a single protein subunit (pilin)
    TWITCHING MOTILITY: crawling of bacteria over host cells using type IV pili
FLAGELLUM: big whip-like bacterial appendage that allows bacteria to move
    Parts
        Basal body: protein complex embedded in the cell envelope that moves the rest of the flagellum
        Hook: curved segment between anchoring the filament to the basal body
        Filament: long, whip-like structure that moves in circles
    Basal body generates rotation by using a proton gradient, and moves the rest of the flagellum
    Clockwise rotation => tumbling (random direction changes); counterclockwise rotation => sustained movement in the same direction
    Arrangements
        Monotrichous: single flagellum
        Amphitrichous: two flagella in opposite poles of the cell
        Lophotrichous: several flagella in a small surface acting together
ENDOSPORE: dormant form that some bacterial species can enter into under unfavorable conditions
    VEGETATIVE BACTERIA: the usual, metabolically active state of bacteria (vs. the spore form)
    SPORULATION: process where a bacterial cell gives produces a single spore. Activated by adverse conditions
        1. Bacteria divides asymmetrically, creating a single spore
        2. Mother cell engulfs the spore and matures it
        3. Mother cell lysis
        4. Spore can survive under harsh conditions for many years
        5. Spore germinates into a regular vegetative cell when conditions are more favorable
    Bacteria that can produce spores are usually Gram positive
Plasmids
    F plasmid (fertility): enables conjugation
    R plasmid (resistance): antibiotics
    Col plasmid: produce bacteriocins
    Degradative plasmid: degrades substances. Useful for the chemical industry
    Virulence plasmid
BIOFILM: community of bacteria living under a protective extracellular matrix
    Forms on a biotic (e.g. tooth plaque) and abiotic (e.g. implants) surface
    EXTRACELLULAR POLYMERIC SUBSTANCES (EPS): extracellular matrix protecting bacteria in a biofilm. Proteins, polysaccharides, DNA
    Bacteria living here are very resistant (not reachable by antibiotics or immune system) => chronic infections
    Bacteria here express antibiotic resistance genes
    PLANKTONIC BACTERIA: free floating bacteria, vs. the ones living in a biofilm
    Stages
        1. Reversible attachment: planktonic bacteria attach to a surface using weak forces
        2. Irreversible attachment: bacteria attach more firmly using adhesins (e.g. fimbriae)
        3. Maturation: (I) proliferation and EPS formation. (II) A 3D structure is created
        4. Dispersion: some bacteria detach to form new colonies
    Tooth plaque: streptococcus mutans, streptococcus subrinus and others
        Metabolism generates acids => enamel decay
        Periodontitis: chronic inflammation of gums due to immune system response
Antibiotic resistance mechanisms
    Inactivation: bacterial enzymes degrade the antibiotic (e.g. break beta-lactam ring)
    Altered target sites (e.g. mutate ribosome structure)
    Reduced drug uptake: membrane is less permeable to the antibiotic
    Efflux pumps: antibiotic is actively pumped outside of the cell
Horizontal gene transfer: see transformation, transduction, conjugation in 13_genetic_transfer_recombination.txt
Epithelial invasion
    ZIPPERING: triggers epithelial cell uptake by interacting with a receptor => actin polymerization (e.g. listeria)
    TRIGGERING: triggers epithelial cell uptake by injecting molecules that cause actin polymerization (e.g. salmonella)
QUORUM SENSING: bacterial cell to cell communication that triggers genetic regulation depending on the community size
    Triggers different reactions in bacteria when living in a community
    E.g. only express certain genes if there are enough bacteria to make them useful
Toxins
    EXOTOXIN: secreted by bacteria to damage host cells
        SUPERANTIGEN: bind to both MHC II and TCR non-specifically, activating many T cells non-specifically
            TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME: severe condition caused by a disproportionate immune system response to superantigens (e.g. staphylococcus aureus)
        MEMBRANE-DISRUPTING TOXIN: breaks the plasma membrane in host cells (e.g. listeria and phagosome, s. aureus and RBCs)
            Pore-forming toxin: proteins that oligomeryze in the target membrane forming barrels => pores
            Phospholipases: degrade the phospholipids in the plasma membrane
            Causes ion imbalances and cell death
        A-B TOXIN: composed of a B subunit that binds to receptors to cause endocytosis, and an A subunit that causes toxicity in the cell 
            Diphtheria: inhibits elongation factor required for ribosome translocation during translation
            Botulinum: affects neurons at the neuromuscular junction. Inhibits the SNARE complex => no neurotransmitter release
            Tetanus: affects neurons, preventing the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters
            Cholera: activates cAMP production in small intestine cells => ion imbalances => water loss
    ENDOTOXIN: released when bacteria die. Intrinsic component of bacteria (LPS). Can cause septic shock
        SEPSIS: life-threatening condition where the immune system response to an infection causes damage to its own organs
        SEPTIC SHOCK: sepsis with very low blood pressure and other abnormal metabolic activities
        Caused by cytokine storms => general inflammation, vasodilation
    Highly regulated: toxins need to be released at certain points to be effective (genetic regulation)
        Use quorum sensing to release toxins coordinately
        Can be reactive to host signals
        Produced more on nutrient scarcity
    Evolved through mutations and horizontal gene transfer
    Antitoxin therapies
        Antitoxin serums: infect animals with toxins => generate immunity => collect their serum, containing antibodies
            Might generate allergic reactions
        Monoclonal antibodies: antibodies generated by a single clone of an immune cell
            More specific, less side effects. Still in development
        Prophylaxis: any of the above when used to prevent disease in individuals exposed to toxins
        Rare diseases might not have a therapy yet
HEAT-SHOCK RESPONSE: response activated on temperature increase. Produces chaperones to correct misfolded proteins
Antibiotics targets
    Cell wall synthesis: beta lactam, vancomycin
    Ribosomes: macrolides, erythromicin (large subunit); tetracyclin, aminoglycosides (small subunit)
    DNA gyrase: fluoroquinolones
    RNA polymerase: rifampicin
    Folic acid: sulfonamides, trimethoprim
PHASE VARIATION: reversible, high-frequency switching between 2 != phenotypes in a clonal population of bacteria
    Via site-specific recombination, DNA replication errors, DNA methylation
    E.g. salmonella varies flagellin (antigen variation)
    E.g. neisseria ghonorrea varies fimbriae (change tissue trophism)
