ENDOPARASITE: parasite that lives in the host's interior
ECTOPARASITE: parasite that live in the host's external surface
PATHOGENICITY: describes the capacity of a pathogen to cause disease
VIRULENCE: describes the severity of the disease that a certain pathogen may cause
RED QUEEN HYPOTHESIS: host and parasites are in a constant race to survive, constantly evolving to adapt
    Genetic variation is important => sexual reproduction
ETIOLOGY: the ultimate cause of the disease (e.g. infection, mutation)
PATHOGENESIS: sequence of events that lead to the appear of a disease
    How much pathogenesis happens depends on the host (e.g. immune system), pathogen (e.g. virulence) and env (e.g. poor hygiene)
COLONIZATION: establishment of a non-invasive, stable colony of microorganism in the host's surface (e.g. microbiota). Vs. infection
INFECTION: entry and multiplication of pathogens into a host. May or may not lead to disease
    SUBCLINICAL INFECTION: infection that causes no or mild symptoms
    CLINICAL INFECTION: infection that causes symptoms and signs
    SYMPTOM: disease-related experience reported by the patient (e.g. pain)
    Sign: measurable evidence of disease in a patient (e.g. fever)
    Acute infections linked to high pathogen loads
    Chronic infections linked to irreversible damage
TISSUE TROPISM: the spectrum of tissues that a pathogen may infect
Steps of pathogenesis
    1. Pathogen in a reservoir comes into contact with the host and enters it
        Skin: wounds
        Respiratory tract (mucosa): inhalation
        Gastrointestinal tract (mucosa): ingestion
        Genitourinary tract (mucosa): sexual transmission
        Conjuntiva (mucosa): eye
        Parenteral route: deposition of pathogens beneath the skin (e.g. insect bite)
    2.a. Attachment to host surfaces
        ADHESIN: protein expressed by bacteria (e.g. fimbriae) and fungi to attach to surfaces
            Target tissue needs to have complementarity with the concrete adhesin => determines the pathogen's tissue tropism
            E.g. escherichia coli binding to intestinal epithelium
            Potential therapeutic targets: should not produce antibiotic resistance (doesn't kill bacteria)
        Biofilms
        Apical complex
        Hooks, suckers, claws
    2.b. Colonization: overthrowing the local microbiota
    3.a. Invasion of host tissues
        Crossing the epithelial barrier
            Active: pathogens cause their uptake by host cells (e.g. zippering, triggering)
            Passive: use existing breaches (e.g. inflammation) or cause them by disrupting tight junctions
        Crossing the endothelial barrier (or blood-brain barrier in CNS)
            Transcellular pathway: cross endothelial cells by entering from one side and exiting in the other
            Paracellular pathway: cross between cells after tight junctions have been disrupted
            Trojan horse mechanism: invade immune cells and use them to cross the barrier
        Enzymes that facilitate tissue penetration: proteases, collagenases, hyaluronidases
        Some pathogens use mechanical force
        INVASIN: type of adhesin expressed by some pathogens that bind to integrin receptors and cause uptake (e.g. yersinia pseudotuberculosis)
        Having motile structures (e.g. flagella) helps
    3.b. Evading the immune system
        ANTIGEN VARIATION: pathogen's ability to modify its surface antigens to escape the host's immune system (e.g. trypanosoma brucei)
            Genetic recombination, changes in gene expression
        IMMUNE MODULATION: pathogen's ability to interfere with the host's immune system normal function
            Escaping the phagosome (e.g. listeria)
            Interfering MHC II antigen presentation (e.g. some virus)
            Promoting the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. helminths, helicobacter pylori)
            Directly infecting immune cells (e.g. HIV)
            Helminths: decrease T helpers, increase T regulators 
        HOST MIMICRY: pathogens produce molecules similar to the ones used by the host, confusing the immune system
            Antigen mimicry: antigens in pathogen similar to the ones in the host. Can make the immune system attack its own host
            Molecular mimicry: pathogen produces cytokines similar to the ones in host, confusing the immune system (e.g. virus)
        Living inside the host's cells
    3.c. Causing damage
        Direct: toxins, virus cytophatic effects, mechanical movement
        Indirect: immune system response
    4. Multiplication
    5. Leaving the host to infect other hosts
SYMBIOSIS: long-lived intimate relationship between two organisms. Might be beneficial or not
    MUTUALISM: symbiosis where both organisms benefit (e.g. lichens)
    COMMENSALISM: symbiosis where one organism benefits, while the other is neutral
    PARASITISM: symbiosis where one organism benefits while harming the other
    AMENSALISM: symbiosis where one organism harms the other without obtaining any benefit
    Competition: symbiosis where both organisms are harmed
Balanced virulence: parasites have advantage if they damage the host to feed but not too much, so it doesn't die
Host specificity: in the context of parasites, describes the range of species that a parasite can infect
    The parasite may have specialized structures (e.g. fimbriae), needs to survive the host, come into contact with it...
    Evolution and host changes can lead to host switching => new diseases
    Species ⊂ genus ⊂ family ⊂ suborder ⊂ order ⊂ class ⊂ phylum ⊂ kingdom (e.g. animalia) ⊂ domain (e.g. eukaryotes)
    Strict specialist: single species
    Congeneric specialist: single genus
    Suprageneric specialist: single family
    Low generalist: single suborder
    High generalist: many suborders
Parasites with complex life cycles
    INTERMEDIATE HOST: where the immature parasite grows and (maybe) reproduces asexually. Transmits it to the definitive host
    DEFINITIVE HOST: where the parasite reaches maturity and reproduces sexually
Host manipulation: some parasites can alter the host's behavior for their benefit
    Neurotransmitter alteration
    E.g. toxoplasma makes rodents be eaten by cats
ZOONOTIC INFECTION: disease transmitted from an animal to a human
    Host jump: the process where a disease changes species
HERD IMMUNITY: situation where most individuals in a community are immune to a disease, so it doesn't spread
