MICROBIOME: ecosystem composed by the microorganisms living within the human body (or other system), their genome and their env
    It's not just bacteria - includes also other kingdoms
MICROBIOTA: the community of organisms living within the microbiome
METAGENOME: the collective genetic material of all microorganisms in the microbiome
DYSBIOSIS: disruption in the balance of microbiota
Features
    Diverse: changes between individuals
    !Dynamic: changes with time, environment, diet...
    Interconnected: influences many other processes
Both host and microbes have evolved adaptations to interact with each other
Study techniques
    Cultivation in the lab. But some organisms are unculturable
    Microscope examination
    Biochemical tests (e.g. Gram staining)
    DNA sequencing (e.g. targeting the 16S rRNA conserved gene in bacteria)
    Bioinformatics
Dynamic composition: changes with time and with many factors
    Diet: the main factor. Good: dietary fiber, prebiotics
    Exercise: good
    !Sleep: getting enough is good
    Antibiotics: bad
TBC: composition
Human microbiome project: in-depth characterization of human microbiota
Gut microbiota
    Mostly anaerobic medium
    Nutrient acquisition: ferments dietary fiber into short-chain fatty acids (SCFA)
        Bacteroidetes and firmicutes
        Butyrate: SCFA that provides energy to colonocytes
    Vitamin synthesis
        Vitamin K: blood clotting. E.coli, bacterioides
        Vitamin B12 and others: lactobacillus, bifidobacterium
    Metabolizes some drugs
    Immune system development
        Stimulates production of antimicrobial substances
        Helps create tolerance
    Modulates the immune system (via SCFAs) => reduce inflammation
    Helps intestinal barrier integrity
        Competition with pathogens
        SCFAs help to produce mucus and tight junctions in the mucosa
    Brain-gut axis
        Communication happens primarily through the vagus nerve
        SCFAs can directly influence neurons or act by entering into the blood stream
        Synthesize some neurotransmitters (?)
        Dysbiosis promotes anxiety and depression
        Sleep: dysbiosis may alter sleep patterns. Not getting enough sleep causes dysbiosis
Skin microbiota
    Composition influenced by humidity and amount of sebum (nutrients)
    Helps skin barrier integrity
    Competition with pathogens
    Immune system development/modulation
    Chemicals (e.g. soaps) and UV light are bad
Oral microbiota: required for oral health but can cause dental decay
    Influenced by saliva composition (nutrient vs. antimicrobial composition) and oral hygiene habits
Respiratory tract microbiota
    Mostly in the upper part
    Competition with pathogens
    Immune system development/modulation
Vagina microbiota: lactobacillus maintains it acid to prevent pathogen growth
