Ribosomes
    Located in cytosol, rough ER, mitochondria, chloroplasts
    Conserved. Differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes
    Composition: proteins and rRNA
        Small subunit has a single RNA molecule
        Large subunit has 2 (prokaryotes) or 3 (eukaryotes) RNA molecules of != sizes
tRNA
    Contains modified bases => Better pairing
    Transcribed as larger pre-tRNA, then spliced (but not by the spliceosome)
    Correct splicing requires correct folding => Quality control (if it didn't fold correctly, it doesn't mature)
RIBOSOME BIOGENESIS: synthesis of ribosomes
    Produced more when the cell needs more proteins: cell division and proliferation
        Glucose and growth factors stimulate ribosome biogenesis
    Steps
        Transcription of rRNA except of 5S: nucleolus
        Transcription of 5S rRNA: nucleoplasm
        Protein synthesis: transcription, translation, import to nucleus
        Assembly of subunits: nucleolus
        Export of subunits (separately) to the cytoplasm
    Nucleolus structure
        Fibrillar center: rRNA transcription
        Dense fibrillar components: pre-rRNA processing
        Granular component: assembled subunits
    NUCLEOLAR ORGANIZER REGION: region of chromosomes coding for rRNA transcribed in the nucleolus
        Single gene, repeated several times across several chromosomes
        Transcribed by RNA polymerase I
        1. Intergenic spacer: non-coding sequence separating rDNA repeats
        2. Origin of replication
        3. ncRNA promoter: gene transcribes to ncRNA that helps in assembly. Transcribed by polymerase II
        4. Spacer promoter: gene transcribes to ncRNA that promotes DNA coiling/uncoiling for regulation
            Upstream binding factor (UBF): protein that actually coils/uncoils DNA for transcription
        5. Upstream control element (UCE): where TFs bind. Brought together to the core promoter to initiate transcription
        6. Core promoter
        7. T0: inhibitor
        8. rRNA genes, separated by internally transcribed spacers (cleavage sites)
        rRNAs produced in a long chain (pre-rRNA). Spliced into final rRNAs by snoRNA
        Some rRNA nucleotides methylated => Make them more hydrophobic, to create the protein exit channel
    5S transcription: TFs bind to the transcribed sequence, rather than before/after
        Then transported to the nucleolus by some proteins
