Background
    CHIRAL: object that can be distinguished from its mirror image
    HEAT-SHOCK PROTEIN: protein that does not denature with high temperatures
    COORDINATE COVALENT BOND: covalent bond where all shared electrons are given by the same atom
    COORDINATION COMPLEX: formed by a central ion (usually metallic) bound to other molecules
Amino-acids
    α-carbon joined to amino group (NH2), carboxyl (COOH), hydrogen, side chain (R)
    α-carbon is chiral
    Side chain confers physical/chemical properties
    two possible conformations, depending on rotation of atoms
        L-ISOMER vs D-ISOMER: isomers that are mirror images. They rotate light in != directions
        Ribosomes only incorporate L amino-acids to proteins
    20 amino-acids happening in nature
    Glycine is the smallest amino-acid, doesn't have a side chain
Primary structure: amino-acid sequence
    Secondary and tertiary structures completely determined by primary structure
    POLYPEPTIDE BACKBONE: repeating N, C atoms that make the peptide chain, vs. side chains
Secondary structure: local structural motifs
    Peptide bond has double-bond character: does't allow rotation along it
        Rotation can happen in the α-carbon to N and C bonds
        Phi, psi: concrete rotation angles for a particular protein
        Not all angles are possible because side chains occupy space
        Ramachandran plot: phi vs. psi angle for each pair of consecutive amino-acids in a protein
            Each cluster in the plot is associated to a secondary structure motif
    Stabilized by many weaker, non-covalent bonds
        Ionic, van der Waals, hydrogen, hydrophilic/hydrophobic
    Motifs that don't involve side-chains common because they can be formed from != amino-acid sequences
        Usually hydrogen bonds N-H <=> C-O
    BETA TURN: tight turn that changes chain direction
        Hydrogen bond between n and n+3
        Not involved in further structure because of tightness
        Limits the size of the molecule
    ALPHA HELIX: protein motif where amino-acids arrange in a helix
        Hydrogen bond between n and n+4
        Less tight than a beta turn
        Side-chains are in the outside part => special properties, e.g. amphipathic
        Common in transmembrane proteins and channels
        Coiling several helices can form fibrils (e.g. collagen)
    BETA SHEET: protein motif where amino-acids arrange in a plane
        Rigid structure
        Anti-parallel: != chain directions. Hydrogen bonds are one on top of the other. More compact
        Parallel: = chain directions. Hydrogen bonds in diagonal
        Can form barrels: cylinders formed of beta-sheets
Tertiary structure: overall 3D structure
    Determines the function of the protein
    In aqueous media, hydrophilic amino-acids in the outside of the molecule, hydrophobic inside
    Folding is reversible: proteins can denature and recover
    Similar amino-acid chains can yield very != tertiary structures
    DISULFIDE BOND: covalent bond between two HS groups => S-S
        Can help stabilize the structure (e.g. keratin)
    Loops: chains of amino-acids that don't have a proper secondary structure, but connect consecutive secondary structures
        Usually in the outer sites
        Recognition sites (vs. other functions, like catalytic)
    Protein folds minimizing its free energy
        Many != conformations with similarly low free energy. Actual one depends on probability, env...
        free energy = f(enthalpy, entropy)
        enthalpy = f(interaction between components of the protein)
        entropy = f(interaction with water)
Quaternary structure: aggregation of several proteins/molecules joined by non-covalent bonds to perform a function
    BINDING SITE: region of a protein that can interact with other molecules through non-covalent bonds
    PROTEIN SUBUNIT: when several proteins interact to form quaternary structure, each of the polypeptide chains composing the bigger molecule
    OLIGOMER: protein composed of several polypeptide chains
        Number of chains: dimer (2), trimer (3), tetramer (4)...
        Homo-oligomers: all their chains identical, vs. hetero-oligomers
        In hetero-oligomers, all chains have similar tertiary structure
PROTEIN DOMAIN: a region of a protein that self-stabilizes and folds independently
    More related to the function than other structures
Protein maturation (after translation)
    Folding: acquire the final tertiary structure
    Cofactor binding: non-covalent interactions
    POST-TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS: covalent changes to a protein after translation
    Bind to other subunits to form quaternary structure
Protein folding
    1. Some proteins fold spontaneously
    2. Otherwise, chaperon proteins aid to fold
    3. Otherwise, incorrectly folded proteins are tagged for degradation
    4. Otherwise, protein aggregates occur (bad)
    Starts as soon as the protein starts exiting the ribosome
    MOLTEN GLOBULE: temporary conformation immediately after translation. Most of its secondary structure present, parts of its tertiary structure absent
    CHAPERONE PROTEINS: aid other proteins in their folding process
        Tertiary structure still determined by aa chain. They only make folding more efficient
        Heat-shock proteins: produced more at high T, because more incorrectly folded proteins at high T
        Use ATP
        Detect incorrectly folded proteins by affinity with exposed hydrophobic patches
        hsp70: acts when the protein is still being translated, on short aa strings
        hsp60: acts after translation. Has an isolation chamber and a cap
PROTEASOME: protease in the cytosol that degrades tagged proteins
    Uses ATP
    Breaks the protein into small amino-acid chains
    Core cylinder: proteolytic capabilities
    Two caps on top/bottom: captures proteins and has ATPases
    Proteins to be degraded are marked with ubiquitin
    E1: ubiquitin-activating enzyme, common to all ubiquitin marking pathways
    Also used to degrade functional proteins that are no longer required (regulate concentration)
    Functional molten globules are sometimes marked for degradation by mistake
N-END RULE: protein's half time is related to its N-terminal residue
    Some amino-acids stabilize (e.g. methionine), others de-stabilize
    If a peptide bond is cleaved and a destabilizing amino-acid is left in the N-terminal, the protein is degraded
AMYLOID: aggregation of several proteins with exposed hydrophobic patches => tight beta-sheets, resistant to proteases
    Cause Huntington's and Alzheimer's diseases
Post-translational modifications
    Adding coordinate covalent bonds containing metal ions (e.g. heme)
    Phosphorylation: activates/inhibits the function of a protein
    Glycosylation: adds a saccharide. Thermal stability
