Background
    WOBBLE BASE-PAIR: pairing between nucleotides that does not follow Watson-Crick rules
GENETIC CODE: codification of amino-acids using mRNA
    CODON: triplet of mRNA nucleotides that specifies a single amino-acid
    Universal: (almost) all organisms have the same code. Except mitochondria and some bacteria
    Degenerate: several codons => 1 amino-acid
        Similar amino-acids encoded by similar codons
        Reduces mutation lethality
    Non-ambiguous: 1 codon => 1 amino-acid
    5' to 3' directionality
    Single reading frame
        START CODON: marks the start of the reading frame. Always AUG (methionine)
        STOP CODON: marks the end of the reading frame. Does not codify for any amino-acid
tRNA ACTIVATION: step of attaching an amino-acid to a tRNA molecule, required before translation
    AMINOACYL-tRNA (aa-tRNA): tRNA with an amino-acid attached
    AMINOACYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE (AARS): enzyme that catalyzes tRNA activation
    1 tRNA => 1 amino-acid
    1 amino-acid => more than one tRNA molecule (degenerate code)
    1 tRNA => more than one codon (wobble pairing in the 3rd nucleotide)
    1 codon => 1 tRNA (non-ambiguous)
    1 AARS <=> 1 amino-acid
    1 AARS => more than one tRNA molecule
    1 tRNA => 1 AARS
    Amino-acid attached at the 3' end of tRNA
    Amino-acid and tRNA joined by a high-energy covalent bond => Energy used later in translation
    Requires energy (ATP)
    Two steps, both catalyzed by AARS
        Attach amino-acid to ATP => Intermediate molecule (aa + AMP)
        Attach molecule to tRNA => aa-tRNA
    AARS structure
        Catalytic domain: produces the synthesis
            Identifies the correct amino-acid based on its size (pocket-like structure) => kinetics
        Editing domain: proofreading
            Detection happens in the 2nd step, when tRNA arrives
            The correct amino-acid does not fit into the editing pocket. Similar ones do
        Anticodon-binding domain: recognize the correct tRNA
        Allosteric domains: recognize other parts of tRNA
        Parasite-specific domains: present only in parasites => attacked by antibiotic
    Charging and peptide bound formation are independent
Translation generics
    Speed-accuracy trade-off
    Ribosome subunits join only during synthesis
    Active site (the one that catalyzes the peptide bond formation) is RNA (vs. a protein)
    Proteins synthesized N => C (by appending amino-acids to the carboxyl end)
    PEPTIDE BOND: covalent bond between C in carboxyl and N in amine group
    Ribosome binding sites
        A (aminoacyl site): entry of charged tRNA
        P (peptidyl site): where the growing peptide is
        E (exit site): where tRNAs exit the ribosome
        mRNA site (small subunit)
    One of the most energy-consuming cell processes
Initiation
    Bottleneck: rate of initiation determines translation speed
    INITIATION FACTOR (IF): molecule that participates in translation initiation
    Initiator tRNA (methionine) has a != structure than regular methionine tRNA => initiation specifics
    Faster in prokaryotes (less integrity checks)
    1. Initiator tRNA binds to small subunit (both)
    2. Small subunit + tRNA binds to mRNA (both)
        RIBOSOME BINDING SITE (prokaryotes): consensus sequence where ribosome binds
            May be more than one in a single mRNA (operons)
            Very close to the start codon
        mRNA recognized by its cap (eukaryotes)
        Integrity check (eukaryotes): if mRNA doesn't have its poly-A tail, translation not performed
    3. Small subunit scans forward until it finds the start codon (eukaryotes)
        LEAKY SCANNING: the small subunit inspects nucleotides surrounding start codon to determine whether to use this codon or skip it
            Used to produce proteins with extra peptide chains that act as a signal to determine what to do with the protein
    4. Initiation factors dissociate => make space for the large subunit (both)
    5. Large subunit binds (both) => initiator tRNA in P site
Elongation
    Large subunit has an exit channel for the peptide chain => Protect it from water
    Conserved process
    Growing peptide remains attached to tRNA until termination
    ELONGATION FACTOR (EF): molecule that participates in the elongation process and makes it efficient
    1. New charged tRNA arrives at A site. Associated with an EF and GTP
    2. If the tRNA pairs correctly with mRNA, EF hydrolizes GTP, dissociates and allows the process to continue
        Introduces a delay => Slower but more accurate (proofreading)
    3. Peptide bond formation
        Bond growing peptide-tRNA in P site breaks => Energy
        Bond growing peptide-tRNA in A site forms
    4. tRNA's acceptor with the growing peptide moves to P site. The one to exit's acceptor to the E site
    5. Translocation: mRNA moved 3 nucleotides forward => tRNAs now in E and P sites
        Uses another EF and GTP
    6. tRNA in E site dissociates
    POLYSOMES: aggregation of ribosomes translating a single mRNA molecule in parallel
        Increase translation throughput
Termination
    MOLECULAR MIMIC: molecule that resembles another molecule in shape and charge
    TERMINATION FACTOR: protein that triggers termination of translation
        Molecular mimic of tRNA
        Binds to the stop codon, introduces a water molecule terminating the protein, and triggers dissociation
    Prokaryote quality control: if mRNA is broken (no stop codon), tags the protein for degradation
        Uses a special mRNA that adds a specific amino-acid sequence as tag
