primary culture: what you extract directly from a biopsy
Hayflick limit: max num times a normal cell can divide until they reach telomeric limit and die
types
    adherent cells: stick to surfaces
    suspension cells: don't stick, e.g. blood cells
    tumoral cells can be used as models because they are immortalized
    passage: the number of times a cell has divided in the lab
    cell lines: a concrete strain of cell type, e.g. HeLa from a particular mammal tumor
confluence: % of surface covered by cells
    makes sense only for adherent cells
    all the cells attached to the surface are alive
    contact inhibition mechanism: cella are sensitive to mechanical signals => when they sense contact, they stop dividing
    work up to 70% confluence, otherwise they will stop dividing
    when we reach this value => pass them to other place so they continue dividing
    they don't attach on top of other cells, they attach to the (treated) plastic only
    trypsin: break all attachments from the cells to the plastic
    medium has serum with nutrients and other stuff. Serum inactivates trypsin
    when we want to remove cells from medium, we wash with PBS, then apply trypsin, cultivate (trypsin needs temperature)
    then put back in flask with medium which deactivates trypsin
primary: just single culture, you don't reseed
secondary: you reseed to amplify (sample, dilution, culture again)
cell line: immortalized secondary culture
    e.g. by mutation that removes mitotic checkpoints, spontaneous or induced. Or because it comes from a tumor
3D is important because it affects dynamics, e.g. effects of a cancer drug
    morphology changes. environment more realistic
    spheroid: very simple 3D cell aggregate
        e.g. tumor has an outer layer where cell divides and inner quiescent layers
    gels: simulate ECM
bright field microscopy: the usual, 2 lens, needs staining
dark field microscopy: doesn't need staining
phase contrast: based on phase differences. Darker zones are dense structures, e.g. nucleus, ribosomes
    doesn't need to kill the cell (no staining)
Nomarsky: variation of phase contrast, to see 3D surface
fluorescent dyes: you need to kill the cell
live imaging with fluorescence
    doesn't need to kill the cell
    modify genetically to make the target protein fluorescent
confocal microscopy: better resolution, but more costly. Use only with higher magnifications
acquisiton in z-plane: iluminate one plane, then take image, repeat
in general, staining or electron = needs to kill the cell
transmission electron microscopy: transmit through the cell (thin sample)
scanning electron microscopy: scan the surface. Thicker sample
    colors are artificial
