Background
    ORGANELLE: specialized subunit within a cell, e.g. nucleus, ribosomes
    VESICLE: structure of liquid surrounded by lipid bilayer
    ENDOMEMBRANE SYSTEM: composed by all membranes inside the cytosol that work together (ER, Golgi, lysosomes, vesicles; but not mitochondria)
!= compartments => Can perform !=, chemically incompatible functions, but more complex
The size and number of organelles depends on cell's function, and might change in time
Transport types
    To/from the nucleus, through nuclear pore complexes
    To ER, mitochondria, chloroplasts, lysosomes, peroxisomes: directly across their membrane
    In vesicles
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER): membranous compartments for biosynthesis and storage
    ROUGH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (RER): has ribosomes attached to it. Protein synthesis and modification
        Ribosomes in RER: to be packed in vesicles for the endomembrane system. Vs free ribosomes: proteins for the cytosol
    SMOOTH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (SER): lipid synthesis, Ca2+ storage, detoxification
        E.g. SER in muscle cells distributed uniformly to produce fast, uniform contraction
        T tubule: invagination of cell muscle's membrane that conducts the nervous impulse (via acetylcholine)
            Causes Ca2+ release and contraction
        When acetylcholine is removed, Ca2+ removed and muscle relaxes
        Liberating Ca2+ does not require ATP, but recapturing does => Rigor mortis
    Both contain chaperones to fold proteins and maintain quality control (incorrectly folded proteins are not allowed out)
    ER STRESS: situation where unfolded proteins accumulate in the ER. Triggers an unfolded protein response
        UNFOLDED PROTEIN RESPONSE: signaling cascade to synthesize more ER and chaperones, or trigger apoptosis
    ER compartments are continuous (same conditions everywhere)
GOLGI APPARATUS: receives vesicles, modifies and sorts its contents, and ships them again
    Golgi cisterna: each of the pancake-shaped sacs that compose the Golgi apparatus
    Golgi stack: a collection of stacked Golgi cisternae. A cell might have more than one stack
    Cisternae are separated (!= conditions in each one)
    Cis part: incoming (receives vesicles). Can be applied for a cisterna or a particular part of a cisterna
        Most of incoming traffic comes from ER => located close to it
    Trans part: outgoing (sends vesicles)
    Anterograde transport: cis => trans. Vs. retrograde transport
    Cargo can be modified in cisternae. Usually by glycosilation
    In the trans cisterna, vesicles are tagged to identify their destination: plasma membrane, lysosomes or secretion
    Models explaining how cargo moves (both true, depends on circumstance and time lapse)
        Vesicular transport model: cisternae's contents don't change with time. Inbound vesicles receive, cargo processed, outbound vesicle formed
        Cisternal maturation model: cisternae's contents change with time. Cisternae travel physically along the stack, from the cis to the trans side
    Defects might inhibit post-translational modification => neurodegeneration
LYSOSOME: membrane-bound organelle that digests material by hydrolysis and recycles them 
    Acidic environment: because degrading enzymes activate with low pH
    Has a proton pump to maintain the acidic environment (consumes ATP)
    Enzymes produced in ER, go through Golgi, and activate in lysosomes
PEROXISOME: membrane-bound organelle that digests material by oxidation, producing H2O2
    Digests lipids and reactive oxygen species
Vesicular transport: substances that travel along the endomembrane system are enclosed in vesicles during transport
    Vesicles coated with specific signal molecules that determine their destination => Specificity
    E.g. clathrin + adaptin 1: Golgi => lysosomes. COPI, COPII also signal molecules
EXOCYTOSIS: process where a cell secretes elements outside of its cytoplasm
    Pathway
        Molecules synthesized in ER
        Shipped in vesicles to Golgi
        Further modified in Golgi
        Shipped in vesicles to the plasma membrane for secretion
    CONSTITUTIVE EXOCYTOSIS: performed by all cells to keep their plasma membrane and ECM in equilibrium
        Vs. regulated exocytosis, performed only by specialized secreting cells
        Vesicles from the Golgi to the plasma membrane have no tag
ENDOCYTOSIS: process where a cell uptakes external elements into its cytoplasm
    PINOCYTOSIS: uptake of small molecules (i.e. fluid). Happens in all cells
    Phagocytosis: uptake of large molecules. Happens only in specialized cells
    Pathway
        Molecules enclosed in vesicles by invaginations of the plasma membrane
        Vesicles fused in endosomes/phagosomes
        Endosomes fused with lysosomes
    ENDOSOME: membrane-bound organelle that acts as sorting station for vesicles internalized by pinocytosis
        Cargo might be directed to lysosomes to be degraded, returned to the membrane or set for secretion
        Early endosome: close to the cell membrane. The ones where recently arrived vesicles fuse with
        Late endosome: close to the nucleus. Formed by maturation/fusion of other endosomes
AUTOPHAGY: pathway where a cell directs its own organelles to digestion in lysosomes
    Digests damaged/unnecessary organelles => material recycling
    Produces materials during starving periods
    AUTOPHAGOSOME: enclosing of an organelle to be recycled in a double membrane, so it can travel to lysosomes

