Background
    PORIN: transmembrane protein that allows passive diffusion of substances of a certain type
    CATABOLISM: set of metabolic pathways that break down macromolecules to produce energy or components
    ANABOLISM/BIOSYNTHESIS: set of metabolic pathways that construct macromolecules
    ACTIVATED CARRIER: molecule that can be split to generate energy (e.g. ATP, NADH)
Break down of food (e.g. sugars) happen in small reactions => Capture energy as activated carriers
Mitochondrion structure
    Matrix: the inside space. Pyruvate oxidation, Krebs
    Inner membrane: impermeable (~plasma membrane). With inside folds (cristae). Oxidative phosphorylation
    Outer membrane: permeable to small molecules (contains porins)
    Intermembrane space: space between inner and outer membranes. Where protons are stored. Contents ~cytoplasm
General pathways
    CELLULAR RESPIRATION: process of oxidizing biological fuels (e.g. glucose) to produce energy, using an electron transport chain. Final acceptor inorganic
        AEROBIC RESPIRATION: cellular respiration pathway where the final acceptor is oxygen
        ANAEROBIC RESPIRATION: cellular respiration pathway where the final acceptor is not oxygen. Less efficient than aerobic
    OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION: synthesis of ATP from ADP in the presence of oxygen
    FERMENTATION: process of oxidizing biological fuels to produce energy, with the final electron acceptor being organic
Digestion: process of breaking down big food molecules (polysaccharides, fats, proteins) into smaller subunits (e.g. glucose)
    Happens outside cells
GLYCOLYSIS: process of breaking down glucose into pyruvate
    Happens in the cytosol
    Requires investing 2x ATP
    Small net yield when compared to other processes: 2x ATP, 2x NADH, 2x pyruvate
    Does not require oxygen
Pyruvate decarboxylation: conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA
    Happens in the mitochondrial matrix
    PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE COMPLEX: enzyme that performs pyruvate oxidation in mitochondria
    Yields 1x CO2, 1x NADH, 1x acetyl CoA
    Similar reactions exist for fatty acids and proteins
CITRIC ACID CYCLE/KREBS CYCLE: cycle of oxidation of acetyl CoA that yields activated carriers
    Happens in the mitochondrial matrix
    Every iteration requires 1x acetyl CoA, yields 3x NADH, 1x FADH2, 1x GTP
    Does not require oxygen (only water)
    Intermediate products used in biosynthesis
Respiratory chain
    ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN (ETC): set of proteins that maintain a proton gradient used to generate energy
    Located in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Gradient between intermembrane space (more protons) and matrix (less)
    NADH, FADH2 donate electrons to ETC
        Electrons pass from lower-affinity to higher-affinity carriers => pump protons outside the matrix
        Final acceptor is O2
    Requires O2 to work
    Regenerates NAD+ to keep glycolysis and Krebs cycle working
    Proton gradient can be used for processes that require energy
        ATP synthesis from ADP
        Heat generation
        Transport of substances through the mitochondrial inner membrane
    ATP SYNTHASE: turbine-like enzyme that generates ATP by letting protons flow downhill their concentration gradient
Fermentation: encompasses glycolysis and NAD+ recovery, only
    Does not require oxygen
    Less efficient than respiration
    NADH electron not used to produce energy. Produces waste and restores NAD+ to keep glycolysis going
    Muscle cells produce lactic acid when oxygen is low
    Microorganisms produce alcohol and CO2
