
No equivalent to PCR for proteomics
Expression proteomics: how much protein is expressed in each cell type?
Structural
    which post-translational modifications does the protein have?
    distribution in intracell compartments
    how does it interact with other proteins
Databases: with all proteins that are expressed per cell type, with their sequence
Mass spectrometry
    Measure mass of intact/partially digested proteins
    You need to ionize the particle you want to measure
    Subject the particle in movement to an electric/magnetic field, measure the radius of trajectory curvature
    Gets a frequency distribution depending on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of the particle
        More mass => deflected less
        More charge => deflected more
    Analytical matching: if you get a sequence of >= 6 amino-acids, that's mostly unique within the proteome
        Although some conserved sequences may match with more than 1 protein
        If different measurements match to the same protein => more confident that it's actually this protein
    Digestion (into smaller peptide chunks) and separation (!= proteins in != tubes) reduce complexity
    There are instruments to measure the masses and the sequence of the peptide chunks
    Problems
        Dynamic: proteins change much more than DNA
        Concentration !=: some proteins with high concentration, other (also interesting) much smaller
        Dynamic range of MS: ~4 orders of magnitude
        Separating increases sensitivity
    Bottom-up: digest into small peptides, then try to recover
        'Shotgun': you need to re-assemble. Less targeted
    Top-down: analyze entire proteins. You get the PTMs and get better results with similar proteins, but isn't universal (works badly for large, hydrophobic proteins)
    First clean-up (detergents, protease inhibitors, DNAses)
    Separating 1st is good because intact proteins have a more varied range of physical properties (e.g. move != in electrophoresis)
    Separation
        Electrophretic
            1D-SDS-PAGE
                Thiol reductant so the protein unfolds
                SDS charges the protein
                Use polyacrylamide (instead of agarose) for the gel
                Regular electrophoresis and measure distance traveled
                Bad resolution
            Isoloelectric focus: migration across a pH gradient
                Proteins move until reaching its isoelectric point
                Might be done in a gel or solution
            2D-SDS-PAGE: combination of 1D-SDS-PAGE and isoelectric focus
                First isoelectric focus, then 1D-SDS-PAGE
                Conventional staining
                Staining might interfere with downstream analysis
        Chromatographic: separate based on interactions between a stationary and a mobile phase
            Mobile phase: the proteins dissolved in liquid/carrier gas (liquid or gas chromatography)
            Samples interacting more move more slowly
            Retention time: how much time does the metabolite take to exit the stationary phase?
    The most used protease is trypsin
        Better if they have a well specifies specificity
        E.g. proteinase K is not specific
    You need charged molecules to get them in mass spectrometer, wide range of techniques to achieve this
    Tandem MS: 1st run a MS to separate by m/z (rough separation), keep only one m/z value, then run another MS with higher accuracy
        QqQ: filter, fragment, filter. Filters efficiently, but lower resolution. Better for quantitative analysis (e.g. how much of a protein do I have?)
        Ion trap: like QqQ, but it produces a finite set of analysis, rather than a continuous flow. Better for qualitative analysis (e.g. sequencing)
    Time-of-flight analyzer: detect based on how much time it takes for molecules to reach the detector
        Q-TOF: like QqQ, but last Q gets replaced by TOF => higher resolution
    Cyclotron resonance: analyzes everything at the same time (without focusing on a single m/z), but very expensive
    Resolution: how able is the tool to detect differences between similar m/z samples? M/dM
    Accuracy: what's the smallest unit of mass that the tool can detect
    Detectors
        Faraday cup: collects ions and produces a current proportional to the number of incident ions
        Dynode: has walls such that every time an ion hits, two electrons are emitted. Amplifies the signal
    Matrix effects: other compounds used in upstream methods (e.g. chromatography) worsen MS results
        Ion suppression: you get less signal than expected, and probably non-linear effects
    Targeted proteomics
        single-reaction monitoring: you need to know the protein of interest and the ion it fragments into
        parallel-reaction monitoring: Q1 selects, Q2 fragments, but then a special analyzer capable of analyzing all the resulting fragments (e.g. PTMs)
Bottom up is not good enough to profile the entire proteome, better for targeted analysis
    Sample preparation critical (e.g. remove salts and detergents)
    Separated using special methods, e.g. specialized chromatography techniques
    No method is enough to separate enough the entire proteome. Sometimes use 2 techniques to separate in 2 dimensions
    Top-down: first measure the intact protein, then fragment, then measure the fragments to read the sequence
Protein identification
    Molecular ion: the ion originated from the precursor molecule, without breaking
    Fragment ion: ions created by breaking the precursor molecule
    Precursor peak: the peak in the frequency in the m/z corresponding to the molecular ion. At m/z=M+
    Base peak: the peak with the highest frequency in the m/z distribution. Doesn't have to be the precursor peak
    For proteins, we usually use soft ionization (breaks molecules less)
    There should be a peak at m/z=M+1 <= corresponds to the relative abundance of 13C (height num carbon atoms/100 * precursor peak)
    Adducts: additional peaks that appear when other compounds (e.g. water, acetic acid) gets integrated in the ions
    Peptide mass fingerprinting: we get the mass spec of peptide fragments => database
        Cleave usually with trypsin => Cut at lysine or arginine, if they're not next to an arginine
        Virtual digestion => From a protein with a known sequence, get the peptides that we may get
        From the sequence mass => Database => Set of protein hits
        The more tolerance we have in mass measurements, the more hits we have
        The more peptides we analyze, the narrower the search
        Good for pure proteins (e.g. confirm 'is this the protein I want?'). But messy for protein mixtures
        Ambiguity: e.g. amino acid rearrange => == mass
        PTMs will fail to match => you may need to remove modifications (e.g. phosphorylations via a phosphatase)
        For identification, not for sequencing
    Sequencing with tandem MS
        Every amino-acid has a != mass
        Peptides usually break through the peptide bond
        If we only get one charge to the molecule
            b-ion: the N-terminus fragment of the molecule
            y-ion: the C-terminus fragment
        A given sequence that breaks generates a given mass spectrum
            Assign peaks y_(N-1), y_(N-2) to the ones in the right
            The difference in mass tells the amino-acid
            Same for the b indices
            With the two sequences, you get the full motif
            Different sequences break in different ways depending on sequence
    identification with tandem MS





Nuclear magnetic resonance: alternative to MS. Less sensitive, but more reproducible, and less destructive
