Metabolites consumed/produced during metabolism, small (<1.5kDa)
Metabolomics: studying metabolite quantities => fingerprints that identify pathological states
No link between metabolite and gene (as opposed to proteins)
    And no relationship between quantity of protein expression and metabolite concentration
    Although can predict whether the metabolite is there or not (e.g. if the enzyme is required)
Metabolome is considered the closer to the phenotype ('what is happening now')
Metabolome much more dynamic than proteome, transcriptome and genome
    Difficult to preserve the metabolome from extraction to analysis
Wide variety of metabolites, with != sizes, physical properties, dynamics, concentrations, polar vs. non-polar
Primary: the ones absolutely required (e.g. amino acids), vs. secondary (e.g. signalling molecules)
Targeted metabolomics: quantify the amount of a known set of metabolites
    You can get concentrations, deeper insights
Untargeted metabolomics: identify what metabolites are there without a-priori knowledge
    More difficult, no standard packs
    Needs to combine retention time and mass spec data
    Less accuracy (too many signals at a time => batch effect)
Metabolic fingerprinting: like unbiased, but comparing two different settings (e.g. healthy vs. diseased)
Metabolic profiling: focus on certain metabolites related to a single pathway (e.g. Krebs cycle)
Quantifying
    Relative: normalized vs. some reference in your cohort. Easier to get, but difficult to extend to other groups
    Absolute: gets the real concentration, but needs calibration and is more involved
No single method that can capture all metabolites
Steps
    Sample preparation
        Quenching: arrest metabolism to prevent metabolite alteration
            Use acid, trypsin, methanol, and freezing
        Volatile molecules vaporize => cold handling
        Metabolite extraction: remove all the enzymes and leave metabolites only
            Targeted methods can use protocols tailored for what they're analyzing
            Solid-phase extraction: concentrate metabolites as much as possible
                Pass it through a solid matrix that interacts with the compound of interest (similar to DNA columns)
                Then wash to remove contaminants
                Then elute into a small volume
                Might loose part of the metabolite
            Liquid-liquid extraction
            Solvent extraction: use a solvent to precipitate proteins and dissolve the compound of interest
                Polar metabolites like polar solvents, non-polar metabolites like non-polar solvents
                Water: the more polar. Might loose anything non very-polar
                Methanol: slightly less polar, very used, can solve some non-polar, too
                You can mix water and water to adjust polarity
                Acetonitrile: middle ground
                Ethyl acetate, chloroform, isopropanol: non-polar (e.g. lipids)
    Separation: reduce complexity
        Liquid chromatography: the more used. For polar metabolites
        Gas chromatography: for the volatile compounds
        Derivatization: convert a metabolite into its volatile counterpart
            Required for gas chromatography
            Can increase peak strength
            Stick a group to the compounds of interest to achieve it
            Reduces polarity
    Mass spec
        Ionization
            Hard: for inorganic compounds and non-polar molecules
            Soft: for the rest. E.g. electrospray
                Positive ion mode: compound gains a proton, for basic compounds. Better for untargeted, because it gets more ions
                Negative ion mode: compound loses a proton, for acid compounds. Cleaner if you can do it
            MALDI: for intact samples
            In-source fragmentation: your ion fragments in the mass spec. Unwanted
        Mass analyzer: usually QqQ (filter by m/z, then fragment, then filter by m/z and detect)
        Analyze in a similar way as in proteomics
    Analysis
        Feature: a (retention time, m/z) pair
        One metabolite associated to several features (e.g. isotopes)
        MSI level: confidence level when annotating your sample. Level 1 (completely confirmed) to level 4 (unknown)
    Nuclear magnetic resonance
        Quantitative, and does not require separation
        Less sensitivity => you need higher concentrations
        Can be used with compounds that can't be ionized
    Matrix effects: the effect of the medium the sample is in (e.g. solvent)
        E.g. ion suppression
            

            