Background
    Gene expressed CONSTITUTIVELY: expressed continuously by default (vs. facultatively)
    METABOLITE: molecule (usually small) product of metabolism
    PALINDROME: sequence that reads the same in the template and complementary strands (5'->3'). Equal to its reverse complement
    ALLOSTERIC REGULATOR: molecule that binds to an enzyme/protein => conformation change => change in activity
    LEADER SEQUENCE: 5' UTR of mRNA
    DNASE HYPERSENSITIVE SITE: location where chromatin is not tightly packed
    MODULAR PROTEIN: has several domains with uncoupled functions
    STRUCTURAL MOTIF: common 3D structure in molecules like proteins. Appears in several != molecules
    α-HELIX: protein motif where amino acids arrange in a helix. The most common one
    β-SHEET: protein motif where amino acids arrange in a plane
    HYDROPHILIC: polar molecule, attracted to and dissolved by water. Vs HYDROPHOBIC
    LIPOPHILIC: non-polar molecule, attracted to and dissolved by fats
    AMPHIPATH: molecule showing hydrophilic and lipophilic properties
    ATP-ASE: enzyme that decomposes ATP into ADP and free ion to obtain energy and drive other reactions
    THERAPEUTIC TARGET: a molecule, receptor, enzyme... you want to modify when a cell is sick. E.g. for diabetes, insulin
    ANTI-SENSE RNA (asRNA): complementary to mRNA, can bind to it to block its translation
    OPEN READING FRAME (ORF): in prokaryotic DNA or mRNA, a sequence within a valid start and stop codons
    CYTOSINE-PHOSPHATE-GUANINE SITE (CpG site): CG sequence in DNA
    CpG ISLAND: region of genome rich in CpG sites
Regulation points
    (Eukaryotes) before transcription: epigenetics
    (All) transcription factors
    (Eukaryotes) alternate RNA splicing
    (Eukaryotes) RNA transport efficiency
    (All) RNA stability
    (All) Translation efficiency
    (Prokaryotes) Coupled transcription and translation
Regulation circuits
    INDUCTION: activation of the expression of a gene that is off at basal levels
    REPRESSION: deactivation of the expression of a gene that is on at basal levels
    ACTIVATOR: DNA binding molecule that enables the expression of a gene
    REPRESSOR: DNA binding molecule that inhibits the expression of a gene
    POSITIVE CONTROL: control mechanism that acts using an activator
    NEGATIVE CONTROL: control mechanism that acts using a repressor
    Induction by positive control: in basal state, gene off. Induction happens with an activator.
    Induction by negative control: in basal state, gene off because of repressor. Inactivating the repressor makes it express.
    Repression by positive control: in basal state, gene on because of activator. Inactivating the activator represses it.
    Repression by negative control: in basal state, gene on. Repression happens with a repressor.
Control elements
    REGULATOR GENE: gene that encodes a product that performs regulation. Vs. structural gene
    REGULATOR SEQUENCE: DNA segment where a regulator product binds
    CIS-ACTING elements: DNA sites that affect only the DNA molecule where they are. E.g. promoter, enhancer, silencer, operator
    TRANS-ACTING elements: products (and genes encoding them) that regulate genes by interacting with cis-acting elements. Usually RNA/proteins. May act on any copy of its target DNA
OPERON (mostly prokaryotes): DNA sequence containing a single promoter/operator followed by several genes, sharing control sequence.
    All/no genes transcribed.
    a. Promoter
    b. Operator: control sequence, downstream the promoter, to which a trans control element (repressor or activator) binds. Physically linked to the structural genes (vs. enhancers)
    c. Structural genes 
    E.g. operon lac only expressed when lactose present: metabolite of lactose => inducer => inactivates repressor => induction by negative control
    E.g. operon lac only expressed when no glucose present: no glucose => inducer => activates activator => induction by positive control
    E.g. operon trp expressed when no tryptophan: repressor activated by tryptophan => repression by negative control
    INDUCER: molecule that interacts with an activator/repressor to produce induction
    COREPRESSOR: molecule that interacts with an activator/repressor to produce repression
ATTENUATION (prokaryotes): termination of transcription before structural genes by an interference of translation
    E.g. operon trp has leader sequences containing trp, causing termination if trp is available
TWO COMPONENT SYSTEMS (mostly prokaryotes)
    Sensor kinase: transmembrane protein that senses changes in the environment
    Response regulator: phosphorylated by sensor kinase on activation. Triggers regulation
Eukaryotes generalities
    Default status no transcription (chromatin superstructure) => Activators
    COACTIVATOR: protein that enhances transcription but does not bind to DNA (i.e. not a transcription factor). E.g. mediator
LOCUS CONTROL REGION (LCR) (eukaryotes): cis, distal element that increases expression of gene clusters
    Tissue-specific: usually control genes that are expressed only in some types of cells
    Copy-number dependent: the more copies of LCR, the bigger the expression
    Contain DNAse hypersensitive sites
    Recruit chromatin-modifying elements, co-activators, transcription complexes
INSULATOR (eukaryotes): cis, distal element that limits interaction between other elements
    TOPOLOGICALLY-ASSOCIATED DOMAIN (TAD): section of genome surrounded by insulators
        Elements within the domain interact, but can't interact with elements in other domains
    Working as barrier: prevents spreading of heterochromatin
    Working as enhancer-blocker: prevents interaction enhancer-gene
TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATION COMPLEX (eukaryotes): trans acting complex that binds to DNA and interacts with basal transcription apparatus
    Activator: modular protein part of the activation complex that can bind to DNA
    Domains of activators
        DNA binding domain: binds to DNA. Provides specificity. The only required one. Usually positively charged.
        Activating domain: interacts with RNA polymerase
        Connecting domain: junction between other domains
        Sensor domain: identifies stimulus
    If the activator doesn't have an activator domain, may interact with another protein (co-activator)
    Two-hybrid experiments: can two proteins interact?
        Bind one to DNA binding domain, another to activation domain, see if there's transcription
        REPORTER GENE: one whose product is very easy to see
    DNA-binding domain motifs
        ZN-FINGER: Zn ion coordinating a finger composed of an α-helix and a β-sheet. Inserts into the major groove
        HELIX-TURN-HELIX: several α-helices that bind to DNA, separated by a small strand of amino acids
        LEUCINE-ZIPPER: dimmer, each containing an α-helix and a bZIP
            α-helix: amphipathic. Leucine residues (hydrophobic) on one side, charged on the other side. Dimmerizes.
            bZIP (basic zipper): positively charged domain at the base of the zipper that binds to DNA
        AMPHIPATHIC HELIX-LOOP-HELIX: generalization of leucine zippers
CHROMATIN REMODELLING: process of changing DNA compaction to regulate transcription (e.g. removing nucleosomes)
    Heterochromatin is usually not transcribed (except for rRNA) - nucleosomes cause basal apparatus to not bind
    CONSTITUTIVE HETEROCHROMATIN: stays like that during the whole cell cycle
        Replicates late
        Has less recombination frequency
    FACULTATIVE HETEROCHROMATIN: changes back and forth to euchromatine
    May result in activation (leaving promoter accessible) or repression (blocking promoter)
    Most transcribed genes retain nucleosomes, they're just displaced to allow transcription
    Remodelling complex: can perform chromatin remodelling
        Has an ATPase subunit
        Doesn't has specificity. Recruited by other factors
        Has domains that interact with histone markers, e.g. bromodomain
HISTONE CODE (hypothesis): set of chemical modifications in histones that affect regulation
    E.g. signals for remodelling complexes
    Histone modifications: groups added at particular positions in tails, recognized by other complexes
    Histone acetylation => activation
        Acetylated by default in replication, before nucleosome assembly. Partially deacetylated afterwards
        Histone acetyltransferase
            Group A: acetylates histones in DNA to activate transcription
            Group B: acetylates newly created histones
        Histone deacetyltransferase: represses transcription
        Activation happens because of conformational change that makes DNA less tightly packed
    Histone methylation => repression
    Histone phosphorylation => repression
    Histone ubiquitination => repression
RIBOSWITCH: mechanism consisting of a mRNA domain that binds a molecule to regulate mRNA expression
    LIGAND: a small molecule that binds the riboswitch to perform regulation
    APTAMER: mRNA domain where the ligand binds
    EXPRESSION PLATFORM: undergoes structural changes in response to the aptamer binding, actually performing the regulation
    Most common in prokaryotes
lncRNA (eukaryotes): >200bp, no ORF
    TRANSCRIPTIONAL INTERFERENCE: condition where the transcription of a section affects negatively the transcription of other sections
    Epigenetics: guide chromatin-remodelling and histone-modifying complexes
    Can interfere or enhance transcription
    Can affect mRNA splicing and stability
    Can block translation and post-translational modifications
SMALL RNA (sRNA) (prokaryotes): base-pair with mRNA + secondary structure => block translation, guide CRISPR
RNA INTERFERENCE (RNAi) (eukaryotes): regulation of expression by RNA (miRNA/siRNA) that targets mRNA
    RNA-INDUCED SILENCING COMPLEX (RISC): miRNA + proteins. Performs RNAi
    miRNA binds to the mRNA to regulate, then proteins regulate expression through mechanisms like mRNA degradation
EPIGENETICS: set of heritable traits that don't imply a change in DNA
    Changes require a mechanism to perpetuate: e.g. HP1 binds to methylated histones and self-aggregates
    POSITION-EFFECT VARIEGATION (PEV): != gene expression in != cells because of != heterochromatin patterns => mosaicism
    Changes are inherited within somatic cells, and some within generations
    Chromatin remodelling and histone modifications
    DNA methylation: repression. Usually at CpG islands. E.g. Barr body
    RNA-INDUCED TRANSCRIPTION SILENCING (RITS): process where miRNA causes genes not to transcribe by generating heterochromatin
    PRION: misfolded protein that can misfold other proteins => Infectious, heritable diseases
