GENE EDITION: alteration of genetic material to achieve something. Requires precise endonuclease + repair system
DSB repair systems
    NON-HOMOLOGOUS END JOINING (NHEJ): repair by joining what is left. Quick, always usable, but introduces errors
        In engineering, can only be used to produce loss-of-function mutations
    HOMOLOGY-DIRECTED REPAIR (HDR): repair by homologous recombination. Requires a template
        More sensitive to cell type and cell cycle phase
        In engineering, produce DSB with endonuclease, provide a template, let HDR reconstruct the break from the template
Endonucleases: must be specific and adaptable
    RESTRICTION ENZYME: enzyme that recognizes DNA and cuts it at a particular sequence
        RESTRICTION SITE: DNA sequence recognized by a restriction enzyme
        Occurs in unicellular, as defense mechanism
        Nicks in both strand, possibly in != points within the restriction site
        Usually targets non-methylated DNA: bacteria keep their DNA methylated to signal it as theirs
        Problem: not specific enough (4-8bp, when 20bp is required)
    MEGANUCLEASE: like restriction enzymes, but with higher specificity
        Occur in mitochondrial/chloroplast DNA and unicellulars
        Problem: difficult to adapt to != sequence
    ZN-FINGER NUCLEASE: Zn-finger domain (generates specificity) + nuclease
        Problem: difficult to generate
    TALENs (transcription activation like effector nucleases): TALE (specificity) + nuclease
        TALE: transcription factors generated by bacteria to attack host
        Problem: difficult to generate
    CRISPR-Cas: specific and easy to adapt: widely used
CRISPR-CAS: part of the immune system of bacteria. RNA guide (specificity) + Cas protein (nuclease)
    Guide RNA (sgRNA): ~20bp long, base-pairs with the target sequence. Easily editable
    PROTOSPACER ADJACENT MOTIF (PAM): short sequence that must be adjacent to the target sequence for the Cas to cut
        Present in viral DNA, but not in the CRISPR locus => Distinguish between them
    CRISPR-Cas9: the most common
    Locus organization
        Leader sequence: promoter
        CAS (CRISPR-associated) genes (operon): encode for nucleases
        CRISPR array: encodes for sgRNA. Repeat | spacer1 | repeat | spacer2 | ... | repeat
            SPACER: encodes for a target sequence
            Repeat: encodes for the rest of the sgRNA
    Stages
        Acquisition: foreign DNA enters the cell, is cleaved and incorporated into the CRISPR array as a spacer
            Cas1, Cas2: nucleases used for acquisition of new spacers
            Each spacer provides memory to deal with re-infections
        Expression: CRISPR array transcribed to precrRNA, then cleaved to form individual crRNAs, one spacer each
            EFFECTOR COMPLEX: crRNA + Cas protein. The complex that performs interference
        Interference: effector complex recognizes external DNA and cleaves it
            PROTOSPACER: sequence of DNA in phage or plasmid that matches a spacer
            Cas proteins recognize PAM, unwind DNA, sgRNA binds proto-spacer, nucleases cleave DNA
    TRANS-ACTIVATING CRISPR RNA (tracrRNA): piece of RNA that binds to crRNA
        RNA strand with the spacer + tracrRNA => sgRNA. Required in Cas9
        When synthesized artificially, crRNA and sgRNA synthesized as a single strand, with an artificial linker (easier)
    Classification
        Class 1: effector complex has several proteins
        Class 2: effector complex has one protein (e.g. Cas9)
    Other applications: fuse another domain to the effector complex. E.g. base editor, activator, inhibitor, methyltransferase...
        PRIME EDITING: modified Cas9 (only single-stranded nicks), reverse-transcriptase, guide RNA with a template. Edition without DSB
    Limitations
        Delivery to cells in the right concentration and right point in cell cycle is challenging. E.g. viral vector
        Efficiency: after successful delivery, gene edition may not happen (e.g. HDR)
        OFF-TARGET EFFECTS: edition of a genome section != original target
            Because Cas protein tolerates certain base mismatches
            Efforts: engineer Cas proteins that tolerate less mismatches
        Immune response: Cas proteins may be recognized as bacterial and attacked
        On-target side effects: correcting a gene defect may have other side effects (e.g. malaria)
