Background
    MOTOR END-PLATE: synapse at the neuromuscular junction
    END-PLATE POTENTIAL: postsynaptic potential at a muscle cell
To be a neurotransmitter, a substance must be
    Present in presynaptic terminal
    Released on depolarization, interacting with Ca2+
    Causing an effect in the postsynaptic terminal
DALE'S PRINCIPLE: all neurons release the same set of neurotransmitters at all of their synapses
    CO-TRANSMITTER: set of neurotransmitters released by a neuron, in addition to the most abundant one
    Currently challenged: some neurons don't fit this, and trigger frequency influences which transmitters are released
Neuropeptides are often co-transmitters
    Small neurotransmitters require less Ca2+ than neuropeptides => released at lower stimulation frequencies than neuropeptides
    Small neurotransmitters synthesized at presynaptic terminal. Neuropeptides in the soma
    Small neurotransmitters stored in clear-core vesicles. Neuropeptides in dense-core vesicles
    Small neurotransmitters vesicles are recycled. Neuropeptides vesicles are single use
    Small neurotransmitters usually bind to ionotropic receptors (faster, local), neuropeptides to metabotropic receptors (slower, for modulation)
QUANTAL RELEASE: neurotransmitters are released in discrete quanta. Quantum = one vesicle
    MINIATURE END-PLATE POTENTIAL: end-plate potential caused by the release of one quantum. < threshold
Release process (small neurotransmitter)
    There is a reserve pool at the presynaptic terminal containing loaded vesicles
    SYNAPSIN: protein that keeps vesicles attached to the reserve pool
    CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT-KINASE: kinase activated by Ca2+ that phosphorylates synapsin => detaches vesicles from the reserve pool
    SYNAPTOTAGMIN: protein attached to the vesicles that binds Ca2+ to cause the final release (SNAREs don't bind Ca2+)
    1. Action potential arrives => Ca2+ enters the cell
    2. Vesicles are mobilized from the reserve pool by phosphorylation of synapsin
    3. Vesicles are docked to the plasma membrane by SNARE proteins
    4. Priming: SNAREs are arranged into the required conformation for exocytosis
    5. Synaptotagmin curves the plasma membrane until fusion
    6. Budding: new empty vesicles are extracted from the plasma membrane by clathrin coating. Dynamin finishes the budding process
