Epithelium: outer layer
    Lumen: outer part
    Apical domain: contact with the env
    Lateral domain: contact with other cells
    Basal domain: contact with connective tissue
    Avascular: no blood vessels
    Simple: 1 cell deep
        Squamous: planar cells (e.g. respiratory)
        Cuboidal: cubes (e.g. kidney tubules)
        Columnar: e.g. stomach
        Pseudo-stratify: all cells attached to the base membrane, but not all of them reach the apical (e.g. urinary)
    Stratified: several cells deep
        The last layer is what identifies the morphologies
        Squamous: epidermis
        Cuboidal 
        Columnar
        Transitional: a mixture of cells (e.g. urinary)
    Apical domain modifications: confer != fns to the tissue
        Microvilli: actin filaments with passive movement (e.g. intestine)
        Stereocilla: actin filaments, much longer, also passive movement, fewer quantity than microvilli
        Cilia: made of microtubules
            Motile: active movement (e.g. flagella in sperm)
            Primary cilia: passive movement, shorter, != structure
            Nodal: active movement, rotational movement (only embrionic)
    Lateral domain
        Cell-adhesion molecules (CAM)
        All junctions present in every tissue type
        Occluding junction: tight, closed junction. No transport. Close to the apical domain
            Occludin and claudin: proteins that create the junction
        Anchoring junction
            Zonula adherens: bind actin filaments of two cells to join cells together. Made of proteins:
                Cadherin: protein that requires Ca to create the binding
                Nectin: they don't need Ca
            Macula adherens: like zonula adherens, but use intermediate filaments instead of actin filaments
                Desmocollin, desmoglein: proteins that create these bridges
        Communicating junction
            Connexon: connecting tube between cells
            Connexin: protein that forms connexons
            Can be closed or open, can change from one to another
    Basal domain
        Basement membrane: structure between epithelium and connective tissue
            Made of extracellular proteins (no cells)
            Attachment to both tissues
            Filters molecules => involved in cell signalling
            Scaffolding to regenerate tissue
            Basal lamina
                Laminin network
                Collagen IV that maintains the laminin network together
            Reticular lamina
                Below basal lamina
                Composed of reticular fibrils + microfibrilin network + type VII colagen
            Reticular not present in all tissues, and tends to be lost during histological preparations
        Cell-to-extracellular matrix junctions: attach epithelial cells to extracellular matrix in connective tissue
            Focal adhesions: anchor actin filaments in the epithelial cells to the Basement membrane and the matrix below. Crosses the membrane
            Hemidesmosomes: same but for intermediate filaments
        Basement membrane infoldings: membrane not homogeneous. != curvature
            Increases cell surface => Facilitate interactions between epithelial cells and connective tissue
    Gland: epithelial tissue whose main function is to secrete substances, either to lumen or to connective tissue
        Exocrine gland: product secreted to the lumen
            Merocrine: substance surrounded by vesicles (e.g. pancreas)
            Apocrine: substance surrounded by cell membrane (e.g. mamary gland)
            Holocrine: substance liberated by apoptosis when concentration is high (usually in stratified, because cell dies => next layer comes. e.g. sebus)
        Endocrine gland: through the basal domain => connective tissue => blood stream (e.g. hormones)
        For both glands above, and using the same mechanisms above
            Paracrine: reach a close epithelial/connective tissue cell
            Autocrine: reach the same cell that produces the product
                Mechanism of self-regulation: when there's enough product, stop producing product. Negative feedback loop. Doesn't have to be the same molecule as secreted, but it's related
Connective tissue: cells + extracellular matrix
    Continuous along body, supports other tissues (?)
    Cell population embedded in extracellular matrix that fills the gaps
    Vascular: lots of blood vessels
    Matrix
        Protein fibers
        Ground substance: liquid/gel substance filling the holes
    Classified based on the type of extracellular matrix
    Embryonic: embryo and umbilical cord
        Mesenchyme: from mesoderm. Cells suspended in matrix of collagen and reticular fibers
        Mucous: same cells, but suspended in Wharton's jelly, rich in hialuronic acid
    Connective tissue proper: not specialized
        Loose: more cells than matrix
        Dense: more matrix than cells
    Connective tissue cells
        Resident cell population: they're always there
        Transient cell population: they're there only when needed (mostly blood cells)
    Fibroblast: main cell component
        Synthesizes extracellular matrix
        Planar, ellipsoidal shape
    Myofibroblast: intermediate cell type between muscle cells and Fibroblast
        Can contract
    Macrophages: fagocyte pathogens
    Adipocytes: store lipids
        Hematoxin does not stain lipids
        Adipose tissue: tissue with a lot of adipocytes
    Mast cells: cytoplasm full of granules containing inflammation mediators
    Adult stem cells: always located in connective tissue
        Pericyte: stem cell that regenerates endothelial cells
    extracellular matrix
        Collagen fibers: accumulation of collagen fibrils. Depending on the type of fibril
            Fibrillar (type I), the most abundant
            type IV: basal lamina
            type VII: reticular lamina
        Reticular fibers
        Elastic fibers
    
