Background
    CIRCULATORY SYSTEM/VASCULAR SYSTEM: pumps blood and substances. Made up of cardiovascular (blood) and lymphatic systems
    ARTERY: blood vessel that conducts blood away from the heart
    VEIN: blood vessel that conducts blood towards the heart
    CAPILLARY: the smallest blood/lymph vessels
    PULMONARY CIRCULATION/MINOR CIRCULATION: between heart and lungs, to oxygenate blood
    SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION/MAJOR CIRCULATION: between heart and the rest of the tissues, to deliver oxygen and nutrients
    Forces exerted on blood in capillaries
        Hydrostatic pressure: tends to pump water outside capillaries
        COLLOID OSMOTIC PRESSURE: exerted by the proteins in blood. Tends to drain water inside the capillaries
        More water pumped out than drained in. Remaining water collected forms lymph, collected in lymphoid capillaries
    LYMPH: the substance in lymphatic vessels. Originally excess interstitial fluid. Ends up in veins
    BLOOD SMEAR: test where a drop of blood is smeared on a slide, stained, and cells observed
Functions
    Transport of nutrients, oxygen, waste, hormones, immune system molecules
    Clotting
    Thermoregulation (because brown adipose disappears in adulthood)
ECM
    PLASMA: ECM of blood
    SERUM: plasma without clotting factors. Still contains antibodies, proteins, ions, hormones... E.g. used in transfusions
    Components
        Water: solvent
        Proteins
            ALBUMIN: maintains colloid osmotic pressure and transports substances
            α, β-globulins: transport substances
            γ-globulins: are antibodies
            FIBRINOGEN: coagulation factor
            Complement proteins: part of the immune system
        Other solutes
            Nutrients (e.g. glucose)
            Respiratory gases (e.g. O2 and CO2)
            Metabolic wastes
            ELECTROLYTES: ions solved in plasma (e.g. Na+)
Cell population
    FORMED ELEMENTS: cell population of blood
    HEMATOCRIT (HCT)/PACKED CELL VOLUME (PCV): volume % of reed blood cells in blood

Cells
    Blood smear usually prepared with eosin + methylene blue (instead of hematoxylin)
    Arteries > arterioles > capillaries
    Erythrocyte
        They don't have a cell
        Shape allows them to travel through capillaries (flexible)
        Cytoplasm full of hemoglobin (Fe and heme) => Bind O2 and CO2
    Leukocytes: leave the blood vessels to perform their function
    Thrombocytes: coagulation
        Derived from megakaryocite: big cell that fragments into platelets
        No nucleus
        Zones
            Peripheral zone: rests of cell membrane and glycocalix (maintain integrity)
            Structural zone: maintain structure
            Organelles
            Membrane systems: rests of the megakaryocyte, what caused it to break
Hemopoiesis/Hematopoiesis: generation of blood
    HSCs: pluripotent/hemopoietic stem cells: differentiate into != cells. Located in bone marrow
        Depending on the cytokine that activates it, differentiates
        Myeloid stem cells/Common myeloid progenitors
            Erythrocytes
            Thrombocytes
            Leukocytes that are not lymphocytes
        Lymphoid stem cells/Common lymphoid progenitors
            B lymphocytes
            T lymphocytes
    Happens in red bone marrow
        Sinusoids: specialized blood vessels where the newly synthesized cells are released
        


