Background
    PROPRIOCEPTION: perception of self-position and force
Functional organization
    Central nervous system (CNS)
        Brain: cerebrum (telencéfalo), cerebellum, diencephalon, brain stem (tronco encefálico)
        Spinal cord
    Peripheral nervous system: everything outside the CNS
        Sensory division: conveys input towards the CNS
            Somatic senses: body-related (tact, thermal, pain, proprioception)
            Special senses: smell, taste, vision, hearing, equilibrium
        Motor division: conveys output from the CNS to the effectors
            Somatic nervous system: output to skeletal muscle. Voluntary
            Autonomic nervous system: output to glands, smooth muscle and cardiac muscle. Involuntary
                Sympathetic nervous system: promotes "flight or fight" responses (e.g. increase heart rate)
                Parasympathetic nervous system: promotes "rest and digest" responses (e.g. slower heart rate). Most effectors innervated by both
                Enteric nervous system: regulates smooth muscle and glands in gastrointestinal tract
Functions
    Sensory (input)
    Motor (output)
    Integrative (processing)
Protection
    Bone: cranial bones (brain), vertebrae (spinal cord)
    MENINGES: layers of connective tissue that protect the brain and spinal cord
        DURA MATER: thick, strong layer of dense irregular connective tissue. Continuous with epineurium
            Brain: periosteal (outer) and meningeal (inner) layers. For venous sinuses
            Spinal cord: only one layer
        ARACHNOID MATER: thin connective tissue layer. Avascular. Delicate collagen and elastic fibers
        PIA MATER: very thin connective tissue layer covering brain and spinal cord. Highly vascular
        DENTICULATE LIGAMENTS: extensions of pia mater into arachnoid mater suspending the spinal cord
        EPIDURAL SPACE: space between dura mater and bone (spinal cord only). Highly vascularized
        SUBDURAL SPACE: thin space between dura mater and arachnoid mater. Interstitial fluid
        SUBARACHNOID SPACE: space between arachnoid and pia mater. Cerebrospinal fluid (cushioning)
        DURAL VENOUS SINUS: venous cavity between the two dura matter layers in the brain that drains blood and CSF
Blood vessels
    Arteries
        Vertebral artery: goes with vertebral column through foramen magnum. Supplies the lower structures (spinal cord, brain stem)
        Internal carotid: enters through temporal bone. Supplies the rest of the brain
    Veins: dural venous sinuses => jugular veins
BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER: selective barrier that allows the passage of nutrients and ions, but not pathogens and other cells
    Formed by astrocyte feet and pericytes (basement membrane) and endothelial cells (tight junctions)
    Makes drugs more difficult to transport into the brain
    Permeable: lipid-soluble molecules, gas, nutrients, water
    Non-permeable: water-soluble molecules, toxins, pathogens
CEREBRAL VENTRICULAR SYSTEM: set of 4 cavities in the brain filled with CSF
    Lateral ventricles: one in each hemisphere. Below cerebrum white matter/corpus callosum and basal ganglia
        C shape, with anterior (upper), posterior and inferior horns
    Third ventricle: sagittal, between left and right thalamus
    Fourth ventricle: sagittal, between pons and cerebellum
    SEPTUM PELLUCIDUM: membrane that separates lateral ventricles
    INTERVENTRICULAR FORAMEN: connects anterior (upper) part of each lateral ventricle with the 3rd ventricle
    CEREBRAL AQUEDUCT: channel connecting the 3rd and 4th ventricle. Goes through the midbrain
    CHOROID PLEXUS: capillaries + ependymal cells lining the ventricles, producing CSF
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF): clear liquid circulating the ventricle system, mainly composed of water
    Physical and chemical protection
    Transport of nutrients, waste and hormones
    Choroid plexus => lateral ventricles => 3rd ventricle => 4th ventricle => central canal of spinal cord => subarachnoid space => veins
