Background
    REFLEX RESPONSE: fast, non-conscious response to stimuli
Functions: sensory, motor, reflexes (but not integrative)
Protection: vertebral column, CSF, meninges
External anatomy
    VERTEBRAL CANAL: canal inside vertebrae containing meninges and spinal cord
    SPINAL NERVE: each of the 31 pairs of nerves (left/right) exiting the spinal cord, innervating the body
        INTERVERTEBRAL FORAMEN: lateral spaces between vertebrae, where spinal nerves exit
        Root: bundle of axons that connect spinal nerves with the spinal cord. One dorsal, one ventral root per nerve
        POSTERIOR ROOT GANGLION: ganglion in the posterior (dorsal) root of nerves, containing cell bodies
    SPINAL SEGMENT: segment of spinal cord from where a certain spinal nerve emerges
        Names matching vertebrae where the nerve exits
        Segment may be more superior than matching vertebra (branches from the spinal cord, goes down, then exits)
        1. Cervical
        2. Thoracic
        3. Lumbar
        4. Sacral
        5. Coccygeal
    Cervical enlargement, lumbar enlargement: set of wider segments (more gray matter), where nerves innervating limbs branch
    Spinal cord does not span the entire vertebral canal (ends ~ L1-L2)
    CONUS MEDULLARIS: cone-like structure where the spinal cord ends (inferior part)
    FILUM TERMINALE: thread-like pia mater extensions, from conus medullaris to coccyx. Anchors the spinal cord
    CAUDA EQUINA: set of spinal nerves that exit below conus medullaris
    PLEXUS: network of axons formed by adjacent spinal nerves
        Most spinal nerves don't directly innervate a concrete body part - they first form plexuses with adjacent nerves
        Cervical, brachial, lumbar, sacral
Internal anatomy
    Gray matter inside, white outside
    Separation of left/right sides
        ANTERIOR MEDIAN FISSURE: separates white matter of left/right sides in the anterior part. Big
        POSTERIOR MEDIAN SULCUS: same but for the posterior part. Much smaller
    Columns: vertical regions of white matter within the spinal cord
        Posterior/dorsal column
        Anterior/ventral column
        Lateral column
    Horns: regions of gray matter within the spinal cord
        Posterior/dorsal horn: axons of sensory neurons (bodies in ganglia), interneurons
        Anterior/ventral horn: bodies of spinal motor neurons
        Lateral horn: bodies of autonomic nervous system neurons (only thoracic and lumbar)
    Communicating structures
        White commissure: connects left and right anterior columns
        Gray commissure: connects left and right gray matter
        Central canal: space in the gray commissure, extending the entire spinal cord. Full of CSF. Connects with 4th ventricle
    Section size
        More gray matter in cervical, lumbar enlargements
        More white matter in the superior sections (more axons join)
    PROPRIOSPINAL NEURON: interneuron connecting segments in the spinal cord
Information processing
    1. Sensory receptor detects stimulus and generates signal
    2. Signal received by sensory neuron in posterior root ganglion
    3.a. Signal enters white column and ascends to the brain
    3.b. Signal to interneurons in gray matter, then ascends to the brain via white matter
    3.c. Signal to motor neurons in gray matter, triggering spinal reflexes
    4. Signal from motor neurons in anterior gray horn to spinal nerves and effectors
DERMATOME: part of a body covered by a specific spinal nerve. Overlap
