CEREBELLUM: posterior to pons. Motor adjustment and learning, equilibrium
    Most of the neurons in the brain are here
External anatomy
    Anterior lobe: anterior, upper part
    Posterior lobe: posterior, lower part
    Flocculonodular lobe: small, cylindrical lobe below anterior lobe, next to pons
    Primary fissure: separates anterior and posterior lobes. In the superior surface
    Vermis: separates the cerebellar hemispheres
    CEREBELLAR PEDUNCLES: connect cerebellum with the rest of the CNS
        Superior: to midbrain
        Middle: to pons. Most of the connections happen here
        Inferior: to medulla oblongata
    FALX CEREBELLI: dura mater invagination that separates left and right cerebellar hemispheres
    TRANSVERSE FISSURE: separates cerebrum and cerebellum
Functional divisions
    Vestibulocerebellum: flocculonodular lobe. Info from vestibular system
    Spinocerebellum: vermis and central parts of anterior/posterior lobes. Info <=> spinal cord
    Cerebrocerebellum: rest of anterior/posterior lobes. Info <=> thalamus, cerebral cortex. Motor planning
Histological components
    CEREBELLAR CORTEX: gray matter portion of each folium. Has always the same complexity (vs. cerebral cortex)
        Molecular layer: outermost layer, pale under H&E
            Main area for synapses: dendrites of Purkinje and granular cells
            Stellate cells and basket cells
        Purkinje cell layer: middle, thin layer, with Purkinje cell bodies
        Granular layer: innermost. Contains granular and Golgi type II cells
    ARBOR VITAE: white matter portion of each folium
    CEREBELLAR FOLIA: each of the leaf-shaped ridges in the cerebellar surface
        Each folium contains the cortex and part of the arbor vitae
        Covered by meninges
    DEEP CEREBELLAR NUCLEI: nuclei in the center of the cerebellum
        Neurons use glutamate
        The only cerebellum output
        Excitatory
    Cells and fibers
        Stellate cells: small, spread across the molecular layer
            Neurotransmitter: glutamate (excitatory)
            Output: Purkinje cells
        Basket cells: small, in the molecular layer's base
            Neurotransmitter: GABA (inhibitory)
            Output: Purkinje cells
        Purkinje cells: large, pear-shaped, with a big dendritic tree
            Neurotransmitter: GABA (inhibitory)
            Input: ascending fibers and parallel fibers
            Output: deep cerebellar nuclei. They're the main output component of the cerebellar cortex
                E.g. if a movement fails, inhibit the deep cerebellar nuclei to prevent us from repeating it
        Granular cells: small, dark-staining, in the granular layer
            Neurotransmitter: glutamate (excitatory)
            Output: Purkinje cells (via parallel fibers)
        Golgi type II cells: small, light-staining, in the granular layer
            Neurotransmitter: GABA (inhibitory)
            Output: granular cells
        Parallel fibers: axons of granular cells. Ascend to molecular layer, then run parallel to surface
        Ascending fibers: axons coming from other parts of the brain (e.g. medulla oblongata)
ATAXIA: impaired coordination and movement. Origin: genetic, stroke, alcohol...
