Anatomy
    External ear: captures sound vibrations to make the tympanic membrane vibrate
        EAR AURICLE: formed by cartilage. Captures vibrations
        TYMPANIC MEMBRANE: transmits vibrations to middle ear
    Middle ear: air-filled cavity that transmits and amplifies vibrations to the inner ear using 3 ossicles
    Inner ear: where the receptors for hearing and equilibrium are
        BONY LABYRINTH: external part of inner ear. Surrounded by bone, filled by perilymph
        MEMBRANOUS LABYRINTH: inside the bony labyrinth, separated from it by membranes. Filled by endolymph
        PERILYMPH: liquid inside the bony labyrinth. High Na+, low K+. Similar to other extracellular fluids like CSF
        ENDOLYMPH: liquid inside the membranous labyrinth. Low Na+, high K+. Similar to cytosol
        COCHLEA: set of spiral canals where hearing receptors are. The main canal is composed of 3 inner channels
            VESTIBULAR RAMP/SCALA VESTIBULI: reaches the vestibule (bony). Filled with perilymph
            TYMPANIC RAMP/SCALA TYMPANI: reaches below the vestibule (bony). Filled with perilymph
            COCHLEAR RAMP/COCHLEAR DUCT: reaches the saccule (membranous). Filled with endolymph
            VESTIBULAR MEMBRANE: separates the vestibular and cochlear ramps
            BASILAR MEMBRANE: separates the tympanic and cochlear ramps
            ORGAN OF CORTI/SPIRAL ORGAN: epithelium on top of basilar membrane (in the cochlear ramp), containing the receptors for hearing
            TECTORIAL MEMBRANE: membrane on top of hearing receptors that vibrates with sounds
        VESTIBULE: central part of the middle ear, where ossicles transmit the vibration. Related to equilibrium
            SACCULE: membranous cavity near cochlea
            UTRICLE: membranous, bigger cavity where semicircular canals start
        SEMICIRCULAR CANALS: set of 3 perpendicular canals stemming from vestibule. Related to equilibrium
        Vestibulocochlear nerve: innervates hearing and equilibrium. One branch for cochlea, one for vestibule/semicircular canals
Hearing receptors
    Inner hair cells: in cochlear transversal sections, isolated. The ones that contribute the most to hearing
    Outer hair cells: in cochlear transversal sections, in groups of 3. Contribute to distinguishing frequencies
    TUNNEL OF CORTI: separates inner and outer hair cells
    Pillar cells: create the tunnel of Corti
    Supporting cells: the rest of the cells in the organ of Corti
    All hair cells have stereocilia attached to the tectorial membrane, containing mechanically gated K+ ion channels
    Stereocilia are connected
Hearing transduction
    Resting conditions: K+ channels almost closed => no depolarization
    Sound captured by external ear => amplified by middle ear => makes fluid in the inner ear vibrate => basilar and tectorial membranes vibrate
    Stereocilia bend => K+ channels open => depolarization => Ca2+ channels open => synaptic vesicle release (glutamate)
    != cochlear sections have != membrane widths => != frequencies
Hearing pathway to the brain
    1st order: in ganglion inside cochlea
    2nd order: in medulla oblongata
    Inferior colliculus (midbrain)
    Thalamus
    Primary auditory cortex
Equilibrium receptors
    Hair cells: similar to the ones in hearing. In both vestibule and semicircular canals
    Supporting cells: secrete the glycoprotein layer that makes hair cells move
    Vestibule
        OTOLITH: calcium crystals that sit on top of a membrane and contribute to signal detection
        OTOLITHIC MEMBRANE: glycoprotein layer on top of hair cells
        MACULE: location in saccule and utricle where otoliths and receptors are
    Semicircular canals
        No otoliths here
        CUPULA: glycoprotein layer on top of hair cells in semicircular canals. One long cupule per canal
Equilibrium transduction
    Movement makes otoliths, otolithic membrane or cupule move
    Stereocilia in hair cells bend => depolarization => action potential
Pathway to the brain
    1st order: vestibular ganglia
    2nd order: medulla oblongata
    3rd order: thalamus/cerebellum
    Primary vestibular cortex
